Table of Contents
ROOTS:
Title Page
Dedication
Acknowledgements
HALEY’S COMET
CHAPTER 1
CHAPTER 2
CHAPTER 3
CHAPTER 4
CHAPTER 5
CHAPTER 6
CHAPTER 7
CHAPTER 8
CHAPTER 9
CHAPTER 10
CHAPTER 11
CHAPTER 12
CHAPTER 13
CHAPTER 14
CHAPTER 15
CHAPTER 16
CHAPTER 17
CHAPTER 18
CHAPTER 19
CHAPTER 20
CHAPTER 21
CHAPTER 22
CHAPTER 23
CHAPTER 24
CHAPTER 25
CHAPTER 26
CHAPTER 27

CHAPTER 28
CHAPTER 29
CHAPTER 30
CHAPTER 31
CHAPTER 32
CHAPTER 33
CHAPTER 34
CHAPTER 35
CHAPTER 36
CHAPTER 37
CHAPTER 38
CHAPTER 39
CHAPTER 40
CHAPTER 41
CHAPTER 42
CHAPTER 43
CHAPTER 44
CHAPTER 45
CHAPTER 46
CHAPTER 47
CHAPTER 48
CHAPTER 49
CHAPTER 50
CHAPTER 51
CHAPTER 52
CHAPTER 53
CHAPTER 54
CHAPTER 55
CHAPTER 56
CHAPTER 57
CHAPTER 58
CHAPTER 59
CHAPTER 60
CHAPTER 61
CHAPTER 62
CHAPTER 63
CHAPTER 64
CHAPTER 65
CHAPTER 66

CHAPTER 67
CHAPTER 68
CHAPTER 69
CHAPTER 70
CHAPTER 71
CHAPTER 72
CHAPTER 73
CHAPTER 74
CHAPTER 75
CHAPTER 76
CHAPTER 77
CHAPTER 78
CHAPTER 79
CHAPTER 80
CHAPTER 81
CHAPTER 82
CHAPTER 83
CHAPTER 84
CHAPTER 85
CHAPTER 86
CHAPTER 87
CHAPTER 88
CHAPTER 89
CHAPTER 90
CHAPTER 91
CHAPTER 92
CHAPTER 93
CHAPTER 94
CHAPTER 95
CHAPTER 96
CHAPTER 97
CHAPTER 98
CHAPTER 99
CHAPTER 100
CHAPTER 101
CHAPTER 102
CHAPTER 103
CHAPTER 104
CHAPTER 105

CHAPTER 106
CHAPTER 107
CHAPTER 108
CHAPTER 109
CHAPTER 110
CHAPTER 111
CHAPTER 112
CHAPTER 113
CHAPTER 114
CHAPTER 115
CHAPTER 116
CHAPTER 117
CHAPTER 118
CHAPTER 119
CHAPTER 120

ALEX HALEY
Copyright Page

ROOTS:
The 30th Anniversary Edition
PUBLISHER’S STATEMENT
One of the most important books and television series ever
to appear, Roots, galvanized the nation, and created an
extraordinary political, racial, social and cultural dialogue
that hadn’t been seen since the publication of Uncle Tom’s
Cabin. The book sold over one million copies in the first
year, and the miniseries was watched by an astonishing
130 million people. It also won both the Pulitzer Prize and
the National Book Award. Roots opened up the minds of
Americans of all colors and faiths to one of the darkest and
most painful parts of America’s past.
Over the years, both Roots and Alex Haley have
attracted controversy, which comes with the territory for
trailblazing, iconic books, particularly on the topic of race.
Some of the criticism results from whether ROOTS is fact
or fiction and whether Alex Haley confused these two
issues, a subject he addresses directly in the book. There
is also the fact that Haley was sued for plagiarism when it
was discovered that several dozen paragraphs in Roots
were taken directly from a novel, The African , by Harold
Courlander, who ultimately received a substantial financial
settlement at the end of the case.
But none of the controversy affects the basic issue.
Roots fostered a remarkable dialogue about not just the
past, but the then present day 1970s and how America had
fared since the days portrayed in Roots. Vanguard Press
feels that it is important to publish Roots: The 30th
Anniversary Edition to remind the generation that originally
read it that there are issues that still need to be discussed
and debated, and to introduce to a new and younger

generation, a book that will help them understand, perhaps
for the first time, the reality of what took place during the
time of Roots.

Vanguard Press
A Member of the Perseus Books Group

DEDICATION
It wasn’t planned that Roots’ researching and writing finally
would take twelve years. Just by chance it is being
published in the Bicentennial Year of the United States.
So I dedicate Roots as a birthday offering to my country
within which most of Roots happened.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I owe deep gratitude to so many people for their help with
Roots that pages would be required simply to list them all.
The following are pre-eminent:
George Sims, my lifelong friend from our Henning,
Tennessee, boyhood, is a master researcher who often
traveled with me, sharing both the physical and emotional
adventures. His dedicated combing through volumes by the
hundreds, and other kinds of documents by the thousands
—particularly in the U. S. Library of Congress and the U. S.
National Archives—supplied much of the historical and
cultural material that I have woven around the lives of the
people in this book.
Murray Fisher had been my editor for years at Playboy
magazine when I solicited his clinical expertise to help me
structure this book from a seeming impassable maze of
researched materials. After we had established Roots’
pattern of chapters, next the story line was developed,
which he then shepherded throughout. Finally, in the book’s
pressurized completion phase, he even drafted some of
Roots’ scenes, and his brilliant editing pen steadily
tightened the book’s great length.
The Africa section of this book exists in its detail only
because at a crucial time Mrs. DeWitt Wallace and the
editors of the Reader’s Digest shared and supported my
intense wish to explore if my maternal family’s treasured
oral history might possibly be documented back into Africa
where all black Americans began.
Nor would this book exist in its fullness without the help of
those scores of dedicated librarians and archivists in some
fifty-seven different repositories of information on three
continents. I found that if a librarian or archivist becomes
excited with your own fervor of research, they can turn into
sleuths to aid your quests.
I owe a great debt to Paul R. Reynolds, doyen of literary
agents—whose client I have the pleasure to be—and to

Doubleday Senior Editors Lisa Drew and Ken McCormick,
all of whom have patiently shared and salved my
frustrations across the years of producing Roots.
Finally, I acknowledge immense debt to the griots of
Africa—where today it is rightly said that when a griot dies,
it is as if a library has burned to the ground. The griots
symbolize how all human ancestry goes back to some
place, and some time, where there was no writing. Then,
the memories and the mouths of ancient elders was the
only way that early histories of mankind got passed along ...
for all of us today to know who we are.

HALEY’S COMET
By Michael Eric Dyson

From the very beginning, Alex Haley’s Roots counted as
much more than a mere book. It tapped deeply into the
black American hunger for an African ancestral home that
had been savaged by centuries of slavery and racial
dislocation. More than the sum of its historical and literary
parts—some of which have been rigorously criticized and
debunked—Haley’s quest for his roots changed the way
black folk thought about themselves and how white
America viewed them. No longer were we genealogical
nomads with little hope of learning the names and identities
of the people from whose loins and culture we sprang.
Haley wrote black folk into the book of American heritage
and gave us the confidence to believe that we could find
our forebears even as he shared his own. Kunta and Kizzy
—and Chicken George too—became members of our
black American family. That’s why no flaw or shortcoming in
Haley’s tome could dim the brilliant light he shed on the
black soul. Haley’s monumental achievement helped
convince the nation that the black story is the American
story. He also made it clear that black humanity is a shining
beacon that miraculously endured slavery’s brutal horrors.
I was a seventeen-year-old boarding school student
when Haley’s comet of a book hit the nation’s racial
landscape. It immediately changed the course of our
conversations around school and provided a powerful lens
onto a period of history that few of us really understood.
Until Haley’s book, there was little public grappling with the
drama of American slavery. Of course, the epochal
television miniseries that grew from Haley’s text seized us

in its thrilling exploration of chattel slavery’s vast and vicious
evolution. The book and miniseries also sparked the
phenomenon of black self-discovery. For too long, slavery
had been an American terror that left the lives of black folk
scarred by memories of pain and humiliation. Haley’s book
brought black folk out of the shadows of shame and
ignorance. It also spurred many of us for the first time to
speak openly and honestly about the lingering effects of
centuries-old oppression. If the black freedom struggle of
the ’60s had liberated our bodies from the haunting
imperatives of white supremacy, Haley’s book helped free
our minds and spirits from that same force.
Roots also prodded white America to reject the racial
amnesia that fed its moral immaturity and its racial
irresponsibility. As long as there was no book or image that
captured slavery’s disfiguring reach, the nation could
conduct its business as if all racial problems had been
solved when it finally bestowed civil rights on its black
citizens. But Haley helped us to resist that seductive lie with
a tonic splash of colorful truth: that the nation had yet to
successfully negotiate its perilous ties to an institution that
built white prosperity while crushing black opportunity.
Roots was a soulful reminder that unless we grappled with
the past, we would be forever saddled by its deadening
liabilities. Since it was published during the nation’s blithely
romantic celebration of its bicentennial, Haley’s book
provided a touchstone for alternative history. Haley’s book
helped conscientious citizens to challenge the self-image of
America as an unqualified champion of democracy and
freedom.
The true impact of Haley’s book is that it started a
conversation about black roots that continues to this day.
DNA tests to determine black ancestry are more popular
than ever. Scientific advance is part of the explanation, but
the cultural impetus for such an agenda of racial discovery
lies with Haley’s inspiring book. It is also fitting that Roots
appeared the same year that Black History Week was
officially extended to Black History Month. Haley’s crowning
achievement came along at just the right time to prompt the

investigation of black folks’ noble and complex
contributions to national culture. Haley’s Roots sparked
curiosity among ordinary citizens by making the intricate
relations between race, politics and culture eminently
accessible. Long before demands for history from the
bottom up became a rallying cry of progressive historians,
Haley’s book practiced what it preached. And if he made
missteps along the way, he nevertheless put millions of us
on the right path to racial and historical knowledge that
shaped our reckoning with the color line. Few books can
claim such an impressive pedigree of influence.
Alex Haley’s Roots is unquestionably one of the nation’s
seminal texts. It affected events far beyond its pages and
was a literary North Star that guided us through the long
midnight of slavery’s haunting presence. Roots is an
exercise in the skillful telling of a people’s pilgrimage
through the quagmire of lost racial links to the solid ground
of recovered connections. For that reason alone, it is to be
celebrated as a classic of American ambition and black
striving. Each generation must make up its own mind about
how it will navigate the treacherous waters of our nation’s
racial sin. And each generation must overcome our social
ills through greater knowledge and decisive action. Roots
is a stirring reminder that we can achieve these goals only
if we look history squarely in the face.

CHAPTER 1
Early in the spring of 1750, in the village of Juffure, four
days upriver from the coast of The Gambia, West Africa, a
man-child was born to Omoro and Binta Kinte. Forcing forth
from Binta’s strong young body, he was as black as she
was, flecked and slippery with Binta’s blood, and he was
bawling. The two wrinkled midwives, old Nyo Boto and the
baby’s Grandmother Yaisa, saw that it was a boy and
laughed with joy. According to the forefathers, a boy
firstborn presaged the special blessings of Allah not only
upon the parents but also upon the parents’ families; and
there was the prideful knowledge that the name of Kinte
would thus be both distinguished and perpetuated.
It was the hour before the first crowing of the cocks, and
along with Nyo Boto and Grandma Yaisa’s chatterings, the
first sound the child heard was the muted, rhythmic bompa-bomp-a-bomp of wooden pestles as the other women of
the village pounded couscous grain in their mortars,
preparing the traditional breakfast of porridge that was
cooked in earthen pots over a fire built among three rocks.
The thin blue smoke went curling up pungent and
pleasant, over the small dusty village of round mud huts as
the nasal wailing of Kajali Demba, the village alimamo,
began, calling men to the first of the five daily prayers that
had been offered up to Allah for as long as anyone living
could remember. Hastening from their beds of bamboo
cane and cured hides into their rough cotton tunics, the men
of the village filed briskly to the praying place, where the
alimamo led the worship: “Allahu Akbar! Ashadu an
lailahailala!” (God is great! I bear witness that there is only
one God!) It was after this, as the men were returning
toward their home compounds for breakfast, that Omoro
rushed among them, beaming and excited, to tell them of
his firstborn son. Congratulating him, all of the men echoed
the omens of good fortune.
Each man, back in his own hut, accepted a calabash of

porridge from his wife. Returning to their kitchens in the
rear of the compound, the wives fed next their children, and
finally themselves. When they had finished eating, the men
took up their short, bent-handled hoes, whose wooden
blades had been sheathed with metal by the village
blacksmith, and set off for their day’s work of preparing the
land for farming of the groundnuts and the couscous and
cotton that were the primary men’s crops, as rice was that
of the women, in this hot, lush savanna country of The
Gambia.
By ancient custom, for the next seven days, there was but
a single task with which Omoro would seriously occupy
himself: the selection of a name for his firstborn son. It
would have to be a name rich with history and with promise,
for the people of his tribe—the Mandinkas—believed that a
child would develop seven of the characteristics of
whomever or whatever he was named for.
On behalf of himself and Binta, during this week of
thinking, Omoro visited every household in Juffure, and
invited each family to the naming ceremony of the newborn
child, traditionally on the eighth day of his life. On that day,
like his father and his father’s father, this new son would
become a member of the tribe.
When the eighth day arrived, the villagers gathered in the
early morning before the hut of Omoro and Binta. On their
heads, the women of both families brought calabash
containers of ceremonial sour milk and sweet munko cakes
of pounded rice and honey. Karamo Silla, the jaliba of the
village, was there with his tan-tang drums; and the alimamo,
and the arafang, Brima Cesay, who would some day be the
child’s teacher; and also Omoro’s two brothers, Janneh and
Saloum, who had journeyed from far away to attend the
ceremony when the drumtalk news of their nephew’s birth
had reached them.
As Binta proudly held her new infant, a small patch of his
first hair was shaved off, as was always done on this day,
and all of the women exclaimed at how well formed the
baby was. Then they quieted as the jaliba began to beat his
drums. The alimamo said a prayer over the calabashes of

sour milk and munko cakes, and as he prayed, each guest
touched a calabash brim with his or her right hand, as a
gesture of respect for the food. Then the alimamo turned to
pray over the infant, entreating Allah to grant him long life,
success in bringing credit and pride and many children to
his family, to his village, to his tribe—and, finally, the
strength and the spirit to deserve and to bring honor to the
name he was about to receive.
Omoro then walked out before all of the assembled
people of the village. Moving to his wife’s side, he lifted up
the infant and, as all watched, whispered three times into
his son’s ear the name he had chosen for him. It was the
first time the name had ever been spoken as this child’s
name, for Omoro’s people felt that each human being
should be the first to know who he was.
The tan-tang drum resounded again; and now Omoro
whispered the name into the ear of Binta, and Binta smiled
with pride and pleasure. Then Omoro whispered the name
to the arafang, who stood before the villagers.
“The first child of Omoro and Binta Kinte is named
Kunta!” cried Brima Cesay.
As everyone knew, it was the middle name of the child’s
late grandfather, Kairaba Kunta Kinte, who had come from
his native Mauretania into The Gambia, where he had
saved the people of Juffure from a famine, married
Grandma Yaisa, and then served Juffure honorably till his
death as the village’s holy man.
One by one, the arafang recited the names of the
Mauretanian forefathers of whom the baby’s grandfather,
old Kairaba Kinte, had often told. The names, which were
great and many, went back more than two hundred rains.
Then the jaliba pounded on his tan-tang and all of the
people exclaimed their admiration and respect at such a
distinguished lineage.
Out under the moon and the stars, alone with his son that
eighth night, Omoro completed the naming ritual. Carrying
little Kunta in his strong arms, he walked to the edge of the
village, lifted his baby up with his face to the heavens, and
said softly, “ Fend kiling dorong leh warrata ka iteh tee.”

(Behold—the only thing greater than yourself.)

CHAPTER 2
It was the planting season, and the first rains were soon to
come. On all their farming land, the men of Juffure had piled
tall stacks of dry weeds and set them afire so that the light
wind would nourish the soil by scattering the ashes. And the
women in their rice fields were already planting green
shoots in the mud.
While she was recovering from childbirth, Binta’s rice
plot had been attended by Grandma Yaisa, but now Binta
was ready to resume her duties. With Kunta cradled across
her back in a cotton sling, she walked with the other women
—some of them, including her friend Jankay Touray,
carrying their own newborns, along with the bundles they all
balanced on their heads—to the dugout canoes on the
bank of the village bolong, one of the many tributary canals
that came twisting inland from the Gambia River, known as
the Kamby Bolongo. The canoes went skimming down the
bolong with five or six women in each one, straining against
their short, broad paddles. Each time Binta bent forward to
dip and pull, she felt Kunta’s warm softness pressing
against her back.
The air was heavy with the deep, musky fragrance of the
mangroves, and with the perfumes of the other plants and
trees that grew thickly on both sides of the bolong. Alarmed
by the passing canoes, huge families of baboons, roused
from sleep, began bellowing, springing about and shaking
palm-tree fronds. Wild pigs grunted and snorted, running to
hide themselves among the weeds and bushes. Covering
the muddy banks, thousands of pelicans, cranes, egrets,
herons, storks, gulls, terns, and spoonbills interrupted their
breakfast feeding to watch nervously as the canoes glided
by. Some of the smaller birds took to the air—ringdoves,
skimmers, rails, darters, and kingfishers—circling with shrill
cues until the intruders had passed.
As the canoes arrowed through rippling, busy patches of
water, schools of minnows would leap up together, perform

a silvery dance, and then splash back. Chasing the
minnows, sometimes so hungrily that they flopped right into
a moving canoe, were large, fierce fish that the women
would club with their paddles and stow away for a succulent
evening meal. But this morning the minnows swam around
them undisturbed.
The twisting bolong took the rowing women around a turn
into a wider tributary, and as they came into sight, a great
beating of wings filled the air and a vast living carpet of
seafowl—hundreds of thousands of them, in every color of
the rainbow—rose and filled the sky. The surface of the
water, darkened by the storm of birds and furrowed by their
flapping wings, was flecked with feathers as the women
paddled on.
As they neared the marshy faros where generations of
Juffure women had grown their rice crops, the canoes
passed through swarming clouds of mosquitoes and then,
one after another, nosed in against a walkway of thickly
matted weeds. The weeds bounded and identified each
woman’s plot, where by now the emerald shoots of young
rice stood a hand’s height above the water’s surface.
Since the size of each woman’s plot was decided each
year by Juffure’s Council of Elders, according to how many
mouths each woman had to feed with rice, Binta’s plot was
still a small one. Balancing herself carefully as she stepped
from the canoe with her new baby, Binta took a few steps
and then stopped short, looking with surprise and delight at
a tiny thatch-roofed bamboo hut on stilts. While she was in
labor, Omoro had come here and built it as a shelter for
their son. Typical of men, he had said nothing about it.
Nursing the baby, then nestling him inside his shelter,
Binta changed into the working clothes she had brought in
the bundle on her head, and waded out to work. Bending
nearly double in the water, she pulled up by the roots the
young weeds that, left alone, would outgrow and choke the
rice crop. And whenever Kunta cried, Binta waded out,
dripping water, to nurse him again in the shadow of his
shelter.
Little Kunta basked thus every day in his mother’s

tenderness. Back in her hut each evening, after cooking
and serving Omoro’s dinner, Binta would soften her baby’s
skin by greasing him from head to toe with shea tree butter,
and then—more often than not—she would carry him
proudly across the village to the hut of Grandma Yaisa, who
would bestow upon the baby still more cluckings and
kissings. And both of them would set little Kunta to
whimpering in irritation with their repeated pressings of his
little head, nose, ears, and lips, to shape them correctly.
Sometimes Omoro would take his son away from the
women and carry the blanketed bundle to his own hut—
husbands always resided separately from their wives—
where he would let the child’s eyes and fingers explore
such attractive objects as the saphie charms at the head of
Omoro’s bed, placed there to ward off evil spirits. Anything
colorful intrigued little Kunta—especially his father’s leather
huntsman’s bag, nearly covered by now with cowrie shells,
each for an animal that Omoro had personally brought in as
food for the village. And Kunta cooed over the long, curved
bow and quiver of arrows hanging nearby. Omoro smiled
when a tiny hand reached out and grasped the dark,
slender spear whose shaft was polished from so much use.
He let Kunta touch everything except the prayer rug, which
was sacred to its owner. And alone together in his hut,
Omoro would talk to Kunta of the fine and brave deeds his
son would do when he grew up.
Finally he would return Kunta to Binta’s hut for the next
nursing. Wherever he was, Kunta was happy most of the
time, and he always fell asleep either with Binta rocking him
on her lap or bending over him on her bed, singing softly
such a lullaby as,

My smiling child,
Named for a noble ancestor.
Great hunter or warrior
You will be one day,
Which will give your papa pride.
But always I will remember you thus.
However much Binta loved her baby and her husband,

she also felt a very real anxiety, for Moslem husbands, by
ancient custom, would often select and marry a second wife
during that time when their first wives had babies still
nursing. As yet Omoro had taken no other wife; and since
Binta didn’t want him tempted, she felt that the sooner little
Kunta was able to walk alone, the better, for that was when
the nursing would end.
So Binta was quick to help him as soon as Kunta, at
about thirteen moons, tried his first unsteady steps. And
before long, he was able to toddle about with an assisting
hand. Binta was as relieved as Omoro was proud, and
when Kunta cried for his next feeding, Binta gave her son
not a breast but a sound spanking and a gourd of cow’s
milk.

CHAPTER 3
Three rains had passed, and it was that lean season when
the village’s store of grain and other dried foods from the
last harvest was almost gone. The men had hunted, but they
had returned with only a few small antelopes and gazelle
and some clumsy bushfowl, for in this season of burning
sun, so many of the savanna’s waterholes had dried into
mud that the bigger and better game had moved into deep
forest—at the very time when the people of Juffure needed
all their strength to plant crops for the new harvest. Already,
the wives were stretching their staple meals of couscous
and rice with the tasteless seeds of bamboo cane and with
the bad-tasting dried leaves of the baobab tree. The days
of hunger had begun so early that five goats and two
bullocks—more than last time—were sacrificed to
strengthen everyone’s prayers that Allah might spare the
village from starvation.
Finally the hot skies clouded, the light breezes became
brisk winds and, abruptly as always, the little rains began,
falling warmly and gently as the farmers hoed the softened
earth into long, straight rows in readiness for the seeds.
They knew the planting must be done before the big rains
came.
The next few mornings, after breakfast, instead of
canoeing to their rice fields, the farmers’ wives dressed in
the traditional fertility costumes of large fresh leaves,
symbolizing the green of growing things, and set out for the
furrowed fields of the men. Their voices would be heard
rising and falling even before they appeared as they
chanted ancestral prayers that the couscous and
groundnuts and other seeds in the earthen bowls balanced
on their heads would take strong roots and grow.
With their bare feet moving in step, the line of women
walked and sang three times around every farmer’s field.
Then they separated, and each woman fell in behind a
farmer as he moved along each row, punching a hole in the

earth every few inches with his big toe. Into each hole a
woman dropped a seed, covered it over with her own big
toe, and then moved on. The women worked even harder
than the men, for they not only had to help their husbands
but also tend both the rice fields and the vegetable gardens
they cultivated near their kitchens.
While Binta planted her onions, yams, gourds, cassava,
and bitter tomatoes, little Kunta spent his days romping
under the watchful eyes of the several old grandmothers
who took care of all the children of Juffure who belonged to
the first kafo, which included those under five rains in age.
The boys and girls alike scampered about as naked as
young animals—some of them just beginning to say their
first words. All, like Kunta, were growing fast, laughing and
squealing as they ran after each other around the giant
trunk of the village baobab, played hide-and-seek, and
scattered the dogs and chickens into masses of fur and
feathers.
But all the children—even those as small as Kunta—
would quickly scramble to sit still and quiet when the telling
of a story was promised by one of the old grandmothers.
Though unable yet to understand many of the words, Kunta
would watch with wide eyes as the old women acted out
their stories with such gestures and noises that they really
seemed to be happening.
As little as he was, Kunta was already familiar with some
of the stories that his own Grandma Yaisa had told to him
alone when he had been visiting in her hut. But along with
his first-kafo playmates, he felt that the best storyteller of all
was the beloved, mysterious, and peculiar old Nyo Boto.
Bald-headed, deeply wrinkled, as black as the bottom of a
cooking pot, with her long lemongrass-root chewstick
sticking out like an insect’s feeler between the few teeth
she had left—which were deep orange from the countless
kola nuts she had gnawed on—old Nyo Boto would settle
herself with much grunting on her low stool. Though she
acted gruff, the children knew that she loved them as if they
were her own, which she claimed they all were.
Surrounded by them, she would growl, “Let me tell a story

... ”
“Please!” the children would chorus, wriggling in
anticipation.
And she would begin in the way that all Mandinka
storytellers began: “At this certain time, in this certain
village, lived this certain person.” It was a small boy, she
said, of about their rains, who walked to the riverbank one
day and found a crocodile trapped in a net.
“Help me!” the crocodile cried out.
“You’ll kill me!” cried the boy.
“No! Come nearer!” said the crocodile.
So the boy went up to the crocodile—and instantly was
seized by the teeth in that long mouth.
“Is this how you repay my goodness—with badness?”
cried the boy.
“Of course,” said the crocodile out of the corner of his
mouth. “That is the way of the world.”
The boy refused to believe that, so the crocodile agreed
not to swallow him without getting an opinion from the first
three witnesses to pass by. First was an old donkey.
When the boy asked his opinion, the donkey said, “Now
that I’m old and can no longer work, my master has driven
me out for the leopards to get me!”
“See?” said the crocodile. Next to pass by was an old
horse, who had the same opinion.
“See?” said the crocodile. Then along came a plump
rabbit who said, “Well, I can’t give a good opinion without
seeing this matter as it happened from the beginning.”
Grumbling, the crocodile opened his mouth to tell him—
and the boy jumped out to safety on the riverbank.
“Do you like crocodile meat?” asked the rabbit. The boy
said yes. “And do your parents?” He said yes again. “Then
here is a crocodile ready for the pot.”
The boy ran off and returned with the men of the village,
who helped him to kill the crocodile. But they brought with
them a wuolo dog, which chased and caught and killed the
rabbit, too.
“So the crocodile was right,” said Nyo Boto. “It is the way
of the world that goodness is often repaid with badness.

This is what I have told you as a story.”
“May you be blessed, have strength and prosper!” said
the children gratefully.
Then the other grandmothers would pass among the
children with bowls of freshly toasted beetles and
grasshoppers. These would have been only tasty tidbits at
another time of year, but now, on the eve of the big rains,
with the hungry season already beginning, the toasted
insects had to serve as a noon meal, for only a few handfuls
of couscous and rice remained in most families’
storehouses.

CHAPTER 4
Fresh, brief showers fell almost every morning now, and
between the showers Kunta and his playmates would dash
about excitedly outside. “Mine! Mine!” they would shout at
the pretty rainbows that would arc down to the earth,
seeming never very far away. But the showers also brought
swarms of flying insects whose vicious stinging and biting
soon drove the children back indoors.
Then, suddenly, late one night, the big rains began, and
the people huddled inside their cold huts listening to the
water pound on their thatch roofs, watching the lightning
flash and comforting their children as the frightening thunder
rumbled through the night. Between cloudbursts, they heard
only the barking of the jackals, the howling of the hyenas,
and the croaking of the frogs.
The rains came again the next night, and the next—and
the next—and only at night—flooding the lowlands near the
river, turning their fields into a swamp and their village into
a mudhole. Yet each morning before breakfast, all the
farmers struggled through the mud to Juffure’s little mosque
and implored Allah to send still more rain, for life itself
depended upon enough water to soak deeply into the earth
before the hot suns arrived, which would wither those crops
whose roots could not find enough water to survive.
In the damp nursery hut, dimly lighted and poorly heated
by the burning dry sticks and cattle-dung patties in the
earthen floor’s shallow firehole, old Nyo Boto told Kunta and
the other children of the terrible time she remembered
when there were not enough big rains. No matter how bad
anything was, Nyo Boto would always remember a time
when it was worse. After two days of big rain, she told
them, the burning suns had come. Although the people
prayed very hard to Allah, and danced the ancestral rain
dance, and sacrificed two goats and a bullock every day,
still everything growing in the ground began to parch and
die. Even the forest’s waterholes dried up, said Nyo Boto,

and first wild fowl, and then the forest’s animals, sick from
thirst, began to appear at the village well. In crystal-clear
skies each night, thousands of bright stars shone, and a
cold wind blew, and more and more people grew ill.
Clearly, evil spirits were abroad in Juffure.
Those who were able continued their prayers and their
dances, and finally the last goat and bullock had been
sacrificed. It was as if Allah had turned His back on Juffure.
Some—the old and the weak and the sick—began to die.
Others left town, seeking another village to beg someone
who had food to accept them as slaves, just to get
something into their bellies, and those who stayed behind
lost their spirit and lay down in their huts. It was then, said
Nyo Boto, that Allah had guided the steps of marabout
Kairaba Kunta Kinte into the starving village of Juffure.
Seeing the people’s plight, he kneeled down and prayed to
Allah—almost without sleep and taking only a few sips of
water as nourishment—for the next five days. And on the
evening of the fifth day came a great rain, which fell like a
flood, and saved Juffure.
When she finished her story, the other children looked
with new respect at Kunta, who bore the name of that
distinguished grandfather, husband of Kunta’s Grandma
Yaisa. Even before now, Kunta had seen how the parents
of the other children acted toward Yaisa, and he had
sensed that she was an important woman, just as old Nyo
Boto surely was.
The big rains continued to fall every night until Kunta and
the other children began to see grown-ups wading across
the village in mud up to their ankles and even to their knees,
and even using canoes to paddle from place to place.
Kunta had heard Binta tell Omoro that the rice fields were
flooded in the bolong’s high waters. Cold and hungry, the
children’s fathers sacrificed precious goats and bullocks to
Allah almost every day, patched leaking roofs, shored up
sagging huts—and prayed that their disappearing stock of
rice and couscous would last until the harvest.
But Kunta and the others, being yet little children, paid
less attention to the hunger pangs in their bellies than to

playing in the mud, wrestling each other and sliding on their
naked bottoms. Yet in their longing to see the sun again,
they would wave up at the slate-colored sky and shout—as
they had seen their parents do—“Shine, sun, and I will kill
you a goat!”
The life-giving rain had made every growing thing fresh
and luxuriant. Birds sang everywhere. The trees and plants
were explosions of fragrant blossoms. The reddish-brown,
clinging mud underfoot was newly carpeted each morning,
with the bright-colored petals and green leaves beaten
loose by the rain of the night before. But amid all the
lushness of nature, sickness spread steadily among the
people of Juffure, for none of the richly growing crops was
ripe enough to eat. The adults and children alike would
stare hungrily at the thousands of plump mangoes and
monkey apples hanging heavy on the trees, but the green
fruits were as hard as rocks, and those who bit into them
fell ill and vomited.
“Nothing but skin and bones!” Grandma Yaisa would
exclaim, making a loud clicking noise with her tongue every
time she saw Kunta. But in fact his grandma was almost as
thin as he; for every storehouse in Juffure was now
completely empty. What few of the village’s cattle and goats
and chickens had not been eaten or sacrificed had to be
kept alive—and fed—if there was to be a next year’s crop
of kids and calves and baby chicks. So the people began
to eat rodents, roots, and leaves foraged from in and
around the village on searchings that began when the sun
rose and ended when it set.
If the men had gone to the forests to hunt wild game, as
they frequently did at other times of the year, they wouldn’t
have had the strength to drag it back to the village. Tribal
taboos forbade the Mandinkas to eat the abounding
monkeys and baboons; nor would they touch the many
hens’ eggs that lay about, or the millions of big green
bullfrogs that Mandinkas regarded as poisonous. And as
devout Moslems, they would rather have died than eat the
flesh of the wild pigs that often came rooting in herds right
through the village.

For ages, families of cranes had nested in the topmost
branches of the village’s silk-cotton tree, and when the
young hatched, the big cranes shuttled back and forth
bringing fish, which they had just caught in the bolong, to
feed their babies. Watching for the right moment, the
grandmothers and the children would rush beneath the tree,
whooping and hurling small sticks and stones upward at the
nest. And often, in the noise and confusion, a young crane’s
gaping mouth would miss the fish, and the fish would miss
the nest and come slapping down among the tall tree’s
thick foliage to the ground. The children would struggle over
the prize, and someone’s family would have a feast for
dinner. If one of the stones thrown up by the children
happened to hit a gawky, pin-feathered young crane, it
would sometimes fall from the high nest along with the fish,
killing or injuring itself in the crash against the ground; and
that night a few families would have crane soup. But such
meals were rare.
By the late evening, each family would meet back at their
hut, bringing whatever each individual had found—perhaps
even a mole or a handful of large grubworms, if they were
lucky—for that night’s pot of soup, heavily peppered and
spiced to improve the taste. But such fare filled their bellies
without bringing nourishment. And so it was that the people
of Juffure began to die.

CHAPTER 5
More and more often now, the high-pitched howling of a
woman would be heard throughout the village. The fortunate
were those babies and toddlers yet too young to
understand, for even Kunta was old enough to know that the
howling meant a loved one had just died. In the afternoons,
usually, some sick farmer who had been out cutting weeds
in his field would be carried back to the village on a
bullock’s hide, lying very still.
And disease had begun to swell the legs of some adults.
Yet others developed fevers with heavy perspiration and
trembling chills. And among all the children, small areas on
their arms or legs would puff up, rapidly grow larger and
painfully sore, then the puffed areas would split, leaking a
pinkish fluid that soon became a full, yellow, stinking pus
that drew buzzing flies.
The hurting of the big open sore on Kunta’s leg made
him stumble while trying to run one day. Falling hard, he
was picked up by his playmates, stunned and yelling, with
his forehead bleeding. Since Binta and Omoro were away
farming, they rushed him to the hut of Grandma Yaisa, who
for a number of days now had not appeared in the nursery
hut.
She looked very weak, her black face gaunt and drawn,
and she was sweating under her bullock hide on her
bamboo pallet. But when she saw Kunta, she sprang up to
wipe his bleeding forehead. Embracing him tightly, she
ordered the other children to run and bring her some
kelelalu ants. When they returned, Grandma Yaisa tightly
pressed together the skin’s split edges, then pressed one
struggling driver ant after another against the wound. As
each ant angrily clamped its strong pincers into the flesh on
each side of the cut, she deftly snapped off its body, leaving
the head in place, until the wound was stitched together.
Dismissing the other children, she told Kunta to lie down
and rest alongside her on the bed. He lay and listened to

her labored breathing as she remained silent for some
time. Then Grandma Yaisa’s hand gestured toward a pile
of books on the shelf beside her bed. Speaking slowly and
softly, she told Kunta more about his grandfather, whose
books she said those were.
In his native country of Mauretania, Kairaba Kunta Kinte
had thirty-five rains of age when his teacher, a master
marabout, gave him the blessing that made him a holy man,
said Grandma Yaisa. Kunta’s grandfather had followed a
family tradition of holy men that dated back many hundreds
of rains into Old Mali. As a man of the fourth kafo, he had
begged the old marabout to accept him as a student, and
for the next fifteen rains had traveled with his party of wives,
slaves, students, cattle and goats as he pilgrimaged from
village to village in the service of Allah and his subjects.
Over dusty foot trails and muddy creeks, under hot suns
and cold rains, through green valleys and windy
wastelands, said Grandma Yaisa, they had trekked
southward from Mauretania.
Upon receiving his ordination as a holy man, Kairaba
Kunta Kinte had himself wandered for many moons alone,
among places in Old Mali such as Keyla, Djeela, Kangaba,
and Timbuktu, humbly prostrating himself before very great
old holy men and imploring their blessings for his success,
which they all freely gave. And Allah then guided the young
holy man’s footsteps in a southerly direction, finally to The
Gambia, where he stopped first in the village of Pakali
N’Ding.
In a short while, the people of this village knew, by the
quick results from his prayers, that this young holy man had
upon him Allah’s special favor. Talking drums spread the
news, and soon other villages tried to lure him away,
sending messengers with offers of prime maidens for
wives, and slaves and cattle and goats. And before long he
did move, this time to the village of Jiffarong, but only
because Allah had called him there, for the people of
Jiffarong had little to offer him but their gratitude for his
prayers. It was here that he heard of the village of Juffure,
where people were sick and dying for lack of a big rain.

And so at last he came to Juffure, said Grandma Yaisa,
where for five days, ceaselessly, he had prayed until Allah
sent down the big rain that saved the village.
Learning of Kunta’s grandfather’s great deed, the King of
Barra himself, who ruled this part of The Gambia,
personally presented a choice virgin for the young holy
man’s first wife, and her name was Sireng. By Sireng,
Kairaba Kunta Kinte begot two sons—and he named them
Janneh and Saloum.
By now, Grandma Yaisa had sat up on her bamboo
pallet. “It was then,” she said with shining eyes, “that he saw
Yaisa, dancing the seoruba! My age was fifteen rains!” She
smiled widely, showing her toothless gums. “He needed no
king to choose his next wife!” She looked at Kunta. “It was
from my belly that he begot your papa Omoro.”
That night, back in his mother’s hut, Kunta lay awake for
a long time, thinking of the things Grandma Yaisa had told
him. Many times, Kunta had heard about the grandfather
holy man whose prayers had saved the village, and whom
later Allah had taken back. But Kunta had never truly
understood until now that this man was his father’s father,
that Omoro had known him as he knew Omoro, that
Grandma Yaisa was Omoro’s mother as Binta was his
own. Some day, he too would find a woman such as Binta
to bear him a son of his own. And that son, in turn ...
Turning over and closing his eyes, Kunta followed these
deep thoughts slowly into sleep.

CHAPTER 6
Just before sundown for the next few days, after returning
from the rice field, Binta would send Kunta to the village
well for a calabash of fresh water, which she would use to
boil a soup from whatever scraps she could find. Then she
and Kunta would take some of the soup across the village
to Grandma Yaisa. Binta moved more slowly than usual, it
seemed to Kunta, and he noticed that her belly was very big
and heavy.
While Grandma Yaisa protested weakly that she would
soon feel well again, Binta would clean up the hut and
arrange things. And they would leave Grandma Yaisa
propped up on her bed, eating a bowl of soup along with
some of Binta’s hungry-season bread, made from the
yellow powder that covered the dry black beans of the wild
locust tree.
Then one night, Kunta awakened to find himself being
shaken roughly by his father. Binta was making low,
moaning sounds on her bed, and also within the hut,
moving quickly about, were Nyo Boto and Binta’s friend
Jankay Touray. Omoro hurried across the village with
Kunta, who, wondering what all of this was about, soon
drifted back to sleep on his father’s bed.
In the morning, Omoro again awakened Kunta and said,
“You have a new brother.” Scrambling sleepily onto his
knees and rubbing his eyes, Kunta thought it must be
something very special to so please his usually stern father.
In the afternoon, Kunta was with his kafo mates, looking for
things to eat, when Nyo Boto called him and took him to
see Binta. Looking very tired, she sat on the edge of her
bed gently caressing the baby in her lap. Kunta stood a
moment studying the little wrinkly black thing, then he
looked at the two women smiling at it, and he noticed that
the familiar bigness of Binta’s stomach was suddenly gone.
Going back outside without a word, Kunta stood for a long
moment and then, instead of rejoining his friends, went off

to sit by himself behind his father’s hut and think about what
he had seen.
Kunta continued sleeping in Omoro’s hut for the next
seven nights—not that anyone seemed to notice or care, in
their concern for the new baby. He was beginning to think
that his mother didn’t want him any more—or his father,
either—until, on the evening of the eighth day, Omoro called
him before his mother’s hut, along with everyone else in
Juffure who was physically able, to hear the new baby given
his chosen name, which was Lamin.
That night Kunta slept peacefully and well—back in his
own bed beside his mother and his new brother. But within
a few days, as soon as her strength had returned, Binta
began to take the baby, after cooking and serving
something for Omoro’s and Kunta’s breakfast, and spent
most of each day in the hut of Grandma Yaisa. From the
worried expressions that both Binta and Omoro wore,
Kunta knew that Grandma Yaisa was very sick.
Late one afternoon, a few days later, he and his kafo
mates were out picking mangoes, which had finally
ripened. Bruising the tough, orange-yellow skin against the
nearest rock, they would bite open one plump end to
squeeze and suck out the soft sweet flesh within. They were
collecting basketfuls of monkey apples and wild cashew
nuts when Kunta suddenly heard the howling of a familiar
voice from the direction of his grandma’s hut. A chill shot
through him, for it was the voice of his mother, raised in the
death wail that he had heard so often in recent weeks.
Other women immediately joined in a keening cry that soon
spread all the way across the village. Kunta ran blindly
toward his grandmother’s hut.
Amid the milling confusion, Kunta saw an anguished
Omoro and a bitterly weeping old Nyo Boto. Within
moments, the tobalo drum was being beaten and the jaliba
was loudly crying out the good deeds of Grandma Yaisa’s
long life in Juffure. Numb with shock, Kunta stood watching
blankly as the young unmarried women of the village beat
up dust from the ground with wide fans of plaited grass, as
was the custom on the occasion of a death. No one

seemed to notice Kunta.
As Binta and Nyo Boto and two other shrieking women
entered the hut, the crowd outside fell to their knees and
bowed their heads. Kunta burst suddenly into tears, as
much in fear as in grief. Soon men came with a large,
freshly split log and set it down in front of the hut. Kunta
watched as the women brought out and laid on the log’s flat
surface the body of his grandmother, enclosed from her
neck to her feet in a white cotton winding cloth.
Through his tears, Kunta saw the mourners walk seven
circles around Yaisa, praying and chanting as the alimamo
wailed that she was journeying to spend eternity with Allah
and her ancestors. To give her strength for that journey,
young unmarried men tenderly placed cattle horns filled with
fresh ashes all around her body.
After most of the mourners had filed away, Nyo Boto and
other old women took up posts nearby, huddling and
weeping and squeezing their heads with their hands. Soon,
young women brought the biggest ciboa leaves that could
be found, to protect the old women’s heads from rain
through their vigil. And as the old women sat, the village
drums talked about Grandma Yaisa far into the night.
In the misty morning, according to the custom of the
forefathers, only the men of Juffure—those who were able
to walk—joined the procession to the burying place, not far
past the village, where otherwise none would go, out of the
Mandinkas’ fearful respect for the spirits of their ancestors.
Behind the men who bore Grandma Yaisa on the log came
Omoro, carrying the infant Lamin and holding the hand of
little Kunta, who was too frightened to cry. And behind them
came the other men of the village. The stiff, white-wrapped
body was lowered into the freshly dug hole, and over her
went a thick woven cane mat. Next were thorn bushes, to
keep out the digging hyenas, and the rest of the hole was
packed tight with stones and a mound of fresh earth.
Afterward, for many days, Kunta hardly ate or slept, and
he would not go anywhere with his kafo mates. So grieved
was he that Omoro, one evening, took him to his own hut,
and there beside his bed, speaking to his son more softly

and gently than he ever had before, told him something that
helped to ease his grief.
He said that three groups of people lived in every village.
First were those you could see—walking around, eating,
sleeping, and working. Second were the ancestors, whom
Grandma Yaisa had now joined.
“And the third people—who are they?” asked Kunta.
“The third people,” said Omoro, “are those waiting to be
born.”

CHAPTER 7
The rains had ended, and between the bright blue sky and
the damp earth, the air was heavy with the fragrance of lush
wild blooms and fruits. The early mornings echoed with the
sound of the women’s mortars pounding millet and
couscous and groundnuts—not from the main harvest, but
from those early-growing seeds that the past year’s harvest
had left living in the soil. The men hunted, bringing back
fine, plump antelope, and after passing out the meat, they
scraped and cured the hides. And the women busily
collected the ripened reddish mangkano berries, shaking
the bushes over cloths spread beneath, then drying the
berries in the sun before pounding them to separate the
delicious futo flour from the seeds. Nothing was wasted.
Soaked and boiled with pounded millet, the seeds were
cooked into a sweetish breakfast gruel that Kunta and
everyone else welcomed as a seasonal change of diet
from their usual morning meal of couscous porridge.
As food became more plentiful each day, new life flowed
into Juffure in ways that could be seen and heard. The men
began to walk more briskly to and from their farms,
pridefully inspecting their bountiful crops, which would soon
be ready for harvesting. With the flooded river now
subsiding rapidly, the women were rowing daily to the faro
and pulling out the last of the weeds from among the tall,
green rows of rice.
And the village rang again with the yelling and laughing of
the children back at play after the long hungry season.
Bellies now filled with nourishing food, sores dried into
scabs and falling away, they dashed and frolicked about as
if possessed. One day they would capture some big scarab
dung beetles, line them up for a race, and cheer the fastest
to run outside a circle drawn in the dirt with a stick. Another
day, Kunta and Sitafa Silla, his special friend, who lived in
the hut next to Binta’s, would raid a tall earth mound to dig
up the blind, wingless termites that lived inside, and watch

them pour out by the thousands and scurry frantically to get
away.
Sometimes the boys would rout out little ground squirrels
and chase them into the bush. And they loved nothing better
than to hurl stones and shouts at passing schools of small,
brown, long-tailed monkeys, some of which would throw a
stone back before swinging up to join their screeching
brothers in the topmost branches of a tree. And every day
the boys would wrestle, grabbing each other, sprawling
down, grunting, scrambling and springing up to start all over
again, each one dreaming of the day when he might
become one of Juffure’s champion wrestlers and be
chosen to wage mighty battles with the champions of other
villages during the harvest festivals.
Adults passing anywhere near the children would
solemnly pretend not to see nor hear as Sitafa, Kunta, and
the rest of their kafo growled and roared like lions,
trumpeted like elephants, and grunted like wild pigs, or as
the girls—cooking and tending their dolls and beating their
couscous—played mothers and wives among themselves.
But however hard they were playing, the children never
failed to pay every adult the respect their mothers had
taught them to show always toward their elders. Politely
looking the adults in the eyes, the children would ask,
“Kerabe?” (Do you have peace?) And the adults would
reply, “ Kera dorong.” (Peace only.) And if an adult offered
his hand, each child in turn would clasp it with both hands,
then stand with palms folded over his chest until that adult
passed by.
Kunta’s home-training had been so strict that, it seemed
to him, his every move drew Binta’s irritated finger—
snapping—if, indeed, he wasn’t grabbed and soundly
whipped. When he was eating, he would get a cuff on the
head if Binta caught his eyes on anything except his own
food. And unless he washed off every bit of dirt when he
came into the hut from a hard day’s play, Binta would
snatch up her scratchy sponge of dried plant stems and her
bar of homemade soap and make Kunta think she was
going to scrape off his very hide.

For him ever to stare at her, or at his father, or at any
other adult, would earn him a slap as quickly as when he
committed the equally serious offense of interrupting the
conversation of any grown-up. And for him ever to speak
anything but truth would have been unthinkable. Since there
never seemed any reason for him to lie, he never did.
Though Binta didn’t seem to think so, Kunta tried his best
to be a good boy, and soon began to practice his hometraining lessons with the other children. When
disagreements occurred among them, as they often did—
sometime fanning into exchanges of harsh words and
finger-snapping—Kunta would always turn and walk away,
thus displaying the dignity and self-command that his
mother had taught him were the proudest traits of the
Mandinka tribe.
But almost every night, Kunta got spanked for doing
something bad to his baby brother—usually for frightening
him by snarling fiercely, or by dropping on all fours like a
baboon, rolling his eyes, and stomping his fists like
forepaws upon the ground. “I will bring the toubob!” Binta
would yell at Kunta when he had tried her patience to the
breaking point, scaring Kunta most thoroughly, for the old
grandmothers spoke often of the hairy, red-faced, strangelooking white men whose big canoes stole people away
from their homes.

CHAPTER 8
Though Kunta and his mates were tired and hungry from
play by the time of each day’s setting sun, they would still
race one another to climb small trees and point at the
sinking crimson ball. “He will be even lovelier tomorrow!”
they would shout. And even Juffure’s adults ate dinner
quickly so that they might congregate outside in the
deepening dusk to shout and clap and pound on drums at
the rising of the crescent moon, symbolic of Allah.
But when clouds shrouded that new moon, as they did
this night, the people dispersed, alarmed, and the men
entered the mosque to pray for forgiveness, since a
shrouded new moon meant that the heavenly spirits were
displeased with the people of Juffure. After praying, the
men led their frightened families to the baobab, where
already on this night the jaliba squatted by a small fire,
heating to its utmost tautness the goatskin head of his
talking drum.
Rubbing at his eyes, which smarted from the smoke of
the fire, Kunta remembered the times that drums talking at
night from different villages had troubled his sleep.
Awakening, he would lie there, listening hard; the sounds
and rhythms were so like those of speech that he would
finally understand some of the words, telling of a famine or
a plague, or of the raiding and burning of some village, with
its people killed or stolen away.
Hanging on a branch of the baobab, beside the jaliba,
was a goatskin inscribed with the marks that talk, written
there in Arabic by the arafang. In the flickering firelight,
Kunta watched as the jaliba began to beat the knobby
elbows of his crooked sticks very rapidly and sharply
against different spots on the drumhead. It was an urgent
message for the nearest magic man to come to Juffure and
drive out evil spirits.
Not daring to look up at the moon, the people hurried
home and fearfully went to bed. But at intervals through the

night, the talk of distant drums echoed the appeal of Juffure
for a magic man in other villages as well. Shivering beneath
his cowskin, Kunta guessed that their new moon was
shrouded, too.
The next day, the men of Omoro’s age had to help the
younger men of the village to guard their nearly ripened
fields against the seasonal plague of hungry baboons and
birds. The second-kafo boys were told to be especially
vigilant as they grazed the goats, and the mothers and
grandmothers hovered closer than they normally would over
the toddlers and the babies. The first kafo’s biggest
children, those the size of Kunta and Sitafa, were instructed
to play a little way out past the village’s tall fence, where
they could keep a sharp lookout for any stranger
approaching the travelers’ tree, not far distant. They did, but
none came that day.
He appeared on the second morning—a very old man,
walking with the help of a wooden staff and bearing a large
bundle on his bald head. Spotting him, the children raced
shouting back through the village gate. Leaping up, old Nyo
Boto hobbled over and began to beat on the big tobalo
drum that brought the men rushing back to the village from
their fields a moment before the magic man reached the
gate and entered Juffure.
As the villagers gathered around him, he walked over to
the baobab and set down his bundle carefully on the
ground. Abruptly squatting, he then shook from a wrinkled
goatskin bag a heap of dried objects—a small snake, a
hyena’s jawbone, a monkey’s teeth, a pelican’s wingbone,
various fowls’ feet, and strange roots. Glancing about, he
gestured impatiently for the hushed crowd to give him more
room; and the people moved back as he began to quiver all
over—clearly being attacked by Juffure’s evil spirits.
The magic man’s body writhed, his face contorted, his
eyes rolled wildly, as his trembling hands struggled to force
his resisting wand into contact with the heap of mysterious
objects. When the wand’s tip, with a supreme effort, finally
touched, he fell over backward and lay as if struck by
lightning. The people gasped. But then he slowly began to

revive. The evil spirts had been driven out. As he struggled
weakly to his knees, Juffure’s adults—exhausted but
relieved—went running off to their huts and soon returned
with gifts to press upon him. The magic man added these
to his bundle, which was already large and heavy with gifts
from previous villages, and soon he was on his way to
answer the next call. In his mercy, Allah had seen fit to
spare Juffure once again.

CHAPTER 9
Twelve moons had passed, and with the big rains ended
once again, The Gambia’s season for travelers had begun.
Along the network of walking paths between its villages
came enough visitors—passing by or stopping off in Juffure
—to keep Kunta and his playmates on the lookout almost
every day. After alerting the village when a stranger
appeared, they would rush back out to meet each visitor as
he approached the travelers’ tree. Trooping boldly
alongside him, they would chatter away inquisitively as their
sharp eyes hunted for any signs of his mission or
profession. If they found any, they would abruptly abandon
the visitor and race back ahead to tell the grown-ups in that
day’s hospitality hut. In accordance with ancient tradition, a
different family in each village would be chosen every day
to offer food and shelter to arriving visitors at no cost for as
long as they wished to stay before continuing their journey.
Having been entrusted with the responsibility of serving
as the village lookouts, Kunta, Sitafa, and their kafo mates
began to feel and act older than their rains. Now after
breakfast each morning, they would gather by the arafang’s
schoolyard and kneel quietly to listen as he taught the older
boys—those of the second kafo, just beyond Kunta’s age,
five to nine rains old—how to read their Koranic verses and
to write with grass-quill pens dipped in the black ink of
bitter-orange juice mixed with powdered crust from the
bottom of cooking pots.
When the schoolboys finished their lessons and ran off—
with the tails of their cotton dundikos flapping behind them
—to herd the village’s goats out into the brushlands for the
day’s grazing, Kunta and his mates tried to act very
unconcerned, but the truth was that they envied the older
boys’ long shirts as much as they did their important jobs.
Though he said nothing, Kunta was not alone in feeling that
he was too grown up to be treated like a child and made to
go naked any longer. They avoided suckling babies like

Lamin as if they were diseased, and the toddlers they
regarded as even more unworthy of notice, unless it was to
give them a good whack when no adults were watching.
Shunning even the attentions of the old grandmothers who
had taken care of them for as long as they could remember,
Kunta, Sitafa, and the others began to hang around grownups of their parents’ age in hopes of being seen underfoot
and perhaps sent off on an errand.
It was just before the harvest came that Omoro told Kunta
very casually, one night after dinner, that he wanted him up
early the next day to help guard the crops. Kunta was so
excited he could hardly sleep. After gulping down his
breakfast in the morning, he almost burst with joy when
Omoro handed him the hoe to carry when they set out for
the fields. Kunta and his mates fairly flew up and down the
ripe rows, yelling and waving sticks at the wild pigs and
baboons that came grunting from the brush to root or
snatch up groundnuts. With dirt clods and shouts, they
routed whistling flocks of blackbirds as they wheeled low
over the couscous, for the grandmothers’ stories had told of
ripened fields ruined as quickly by hungry birds as by any
animal. Collecting the handfuls of couscous and groundnuts
that their fathers had cut or pulled up to test for ripeness,
and carrying gourds of cool water for the men to drink, they
worked all through the day with a swiftness equaled only by
their pride.
Six days later, Allah decreed that the harvest should
begin. After the dawn’s suba prayer, the farmers and their
sons—some chosen few carrying small tan-tang and
souraba drums—went out to the fields and waited with
heads cocked, listening. Finally, the village’s great tobalo
drum boomed and the farmers leaped to the harvesting. As
the jaliba and the other drummers walked among them,
beating out a rhythm to match their movements, everyone
began to sing. In exhilaration now and then, a farmer would
fling his hoe, whirling up on one drumbeat and catch it on
the next.
Kunta’s kafo sweated alongside their fathers, shaking
the groundnut bushes free of dirt. Halfway through the

morning came the first rest—and then, at midday, happy
shouts of relief as the women and girls arrived with lunch.
Walking in single file, also singing harvest songs, they took
the pots from their heads, ladled the contents into
calabashes, and served them to the drummers and
harvesters, who ate and then napped until the tobalo
sounded once again.
Piles of the harvest dotted the fields at the end of that first
day. Streaming sweat and mud, the farmers trudged
wearily to the nearest stream, where they took off their
clothes and leaped into the water, laughing and splashing
to cool and clean themselves. Then they headed home,
swatting at the biting flies that buzzed around their
glistening bodies. The closer they came to the smoke that
drifted toward them from the women’s kitchens, the more
tantalizing were the smells of the roasted meats that would
be served three times daily for however long it took to finish
the harvest.
After stuffing himself that night, Kunta noticed—as he had
for several nights—that his mother was sewing something.
She said nothing about it, nor did Kunta ask. But the next
morning, as he picked up his hoe and began to walk out the
door, she looked at him and said gruffly, “Why don’t you put
on your clothes?”
Kunta jerked around. There, hanging from a peg, was a
brand-new dundiko. Struggling to conceal his excitement,
he matter-of-factly put it on and sauntered out the door—
where he burst into a run. Others of his kafo were already
outside—all of them, like him, dressed for the first time in
their lives, all of them leaping, shouting, and laughing
because their nakedness was covered at last. They were
now officially of the second kafo. They were becoming men.

CHAPTER 10
By the time Kunta sauntered back into his mother’s hut that
night, he had made sure that everyone in Juffure had seen
him in his dundiko. Though he hadn’t stopped working all
day, he wasn’t a bit tired, and he knew he’d never be able
to go to sleep at his regular bedtime. Perhaps now that he
was a grown-up, Binta would let him stay up later. But soon
after Lamin was asleep, the same as always, she sent him
to bed—with a reminder to hang up his dundiko.
As he turned to go, sulking as conspicuously as he
thought he could get away with, Binta called him back—
probably to reprimand him for sulking, Kunta thought, or
maybe she’d taken pity on him and changed her mind.
“Your Fa wants to see you in the morning,” she said
casually. Kunta knew better than to ask why, so just said,
“Yes, Mama,” and wished her good night. It was just as well
he wasn’t tired, because he couldn’t sleep now anyway,
lying under his cowhide coverlet wondering what he had
done now that was wrong, as it seemed he did so often.
But racking his brain, he couldn’t think of a single thing,
especially nothing so bad that Binta herself wouldn’t have
whacked him for it, since a father would involve himself only
with something pretty terrible. Finally he gave up worrying
and drifted off to sleep.
At breakfast the next morning, Kunta was so subdued
that he almost forgot the joy of his dundiko, until naked little
Lamin happened to brush up against it. Kunta’s hand
jerked up to shove him away, but a flashing look from Binta
prevented that. After eating, Kunta hung around for a while
hoping that something more might be said by Binta, but
when she acted as if she hadn’t even told him anything, he
reluctantly left the hut and made his way with slow steps to
Omoro’s hut, where he stood outside with folded hands.
When Omoro emerged and silently handed his son a
small new slingshot, Kunta’s breath all but stopped. He
stood looking down at it, then up at his father, not knowing

what to say. “This is yours as one of the second kafo. Be
sure you don’t shoot the wrong thing, and that you hit what
you shoot at.”
Kunta just said, “Yes, Fa,” still tongue-tied beyond that.
“Also, as you are now second kafo,” Omoro went on, “it
means you will begin tending goats and going to school.
You go goat-herding today with Toumani Touray. He and
the other older boys will teach you. Heed them well. And
tomorrow morning you will go to the schoolyard.” Omoro
went back into his hut, and Kunta dashed away to the goat
pens, where he found his friend Sitafa and the rest of his
kafo, all in their new dundikos and clutching their new
slingshots—uncles or older brothers having made them for
boys whose fathers were dead.
The older boys were opening the pens and the bleating
goats were bounding forth, hungry for the day’s grazing.
Seeing Toumani, who was the first son of the couple who
were Omoro’s and Binta’s best friends, Kunta tried to get
near him, but Toumani and his mates were all herding the
goats to bump into the smaller boys, who were trying to
scramble out of the way. But soon the laughing older boys
and the wuolo dogs had the goats hurrying down the dusty
path with Kunta’s kafo running uncertainly behind, clutching
their slingshots and trying to brush the dirtied spots off their
dundikos.
As familiar with goats as Kunta was, he had never
realized how fast they ran. Except for a few walks with his
father, he had never been so far beyond the village as the
goats were leading them—to a wide grazing area of low
brush and grass with the forest on one side and the fields of
village farmers on the other. The older boys each
nonchalantly set their own herds to grazing in separate
grassy spots, while the wuolo dogs walked about or lay
down near the goats.
Toumani finally decided to take notice of Kunta tagging
along behind him, but he acted as if the smaller boy was
some kind of insect. “Do you know the value of a goat?” he
asked, and before Kunta could admit he wasn’t sure, he
said, “Well, if you lose one, your father will let you know!”

And Toumani launched into a lecture of warnings about
goatherding. Foremost was that if any boy’s attention or
laziness let any goat stray away from its herd, no end of
horrible things could happen. Pointing toward the forest,
Toumani said that, for one thing, living just over there, and
often creeping on their bellies through the high grass, were
lions and panthers, which, with but a single spring from the
grass, could tear a goat apart. “But if a boy is close
enough,” said Toumani, “he is tastier than a goat!”
Noting Kunta’s wide eyes with satisfaction, Toumani
went on: Even a worse danger than lions and panthers
were toubob and their black slatee helpers, who would
crawl through the tall grass to grab people and take them
off to a distant place where they were eaten. In his own five
rains of goatherding, he said, nine boys from Juffure had
been taken, and many more from neighboring villages.
Kunta hadn’t known any of the boys who had been lost from
Juffure, but he remembered being so scared when he
heard about them that for a few days he wouldn’t venture
more than a stone’s throw from his mother’s hut.
“But you’re not safe even inside the village gates,” said
Toumani, seeming to read his thoughts. A man he knew
from Juffure, he told Kunta, deprived of everything he
owned when a pride of lions killed his entire herd of goats,
had been caught with toubob money soon after the
disappearance of two third-kafo boys from their own huts
one night. He claimed that he had found the money in the
forest, but the day before his trial by the Council of Elders,
he himself had disappeared. “You would have been too
young to remember this,” said Toumani. “But such things
still happen. So never get out of sight of somebody you
trust. And when you’re out here with your goats, never let
them go where you might have to chase them into deep
bush, or your family may never see you again.”
As Kunta stood quaking with fear, Toumani added that
even if a big cat or a toubob didn’t get him, he could still get
into serious trouble if a goat got away from the herd,
because a boy could never catch a dodging goat once it
got onto someone’s nearby farm of couscous and

groundnuts. And once the boy and his dog were both gone
after it, the remaining flock might start running after the
strayed one, and hungry goats could ruin a farmer’s field
quicker even than baboons, antelopes, or wild pigs.
By noontime, when Toumani shared the lunch his mother
had packed for him and Kunta, the entire new second kafo
had gained a far greater respect for the goats they had
been around all of their lives. After eating, some of
Toumani’s kafo lounged under small trees nearby, and the
rest walked around shooting birds with their students’
untried slingshots. While Kunta and his mates struggled to
look after the goats, the older boys yelled out cautions and
insults and held their sides with laughter at the younger
boys’ frantic shoutings and dashings toward any goat that
as much as raised its head to look around. When Kunta
wasn’t running after the goats, he was casting nervous
glances toward the forest in case anything was lurking there
to eat him.
In the midafternoon, with the goats nearing their fill of
grass, Toumani called Kunta over to him and said sternly,
“Do you intend me to collect your wood for you?” Only then
did Kunta remember how many times he had seen the
goatherds returning in the evening, each of them bearing a
headload of light wood for the night fires of the village. With
the goats and the forest to keep an eye on, it was all Kunta
and his mates could do to run around looking for and
picking up light brush and small fallen limbs that had
become dry enough to burn well. Kunta piled his wood up
into a bundle as large as he thought his head could carry,
but Toumani scoffed and threw on a few more sticks. Then
Kunta tied a slender green liana vine about the wood,
doubtful that he could get it onto his head, let alone all the
distance to the village.
With the older boys observing, he and his mates
somehow managed to hoist their headloads and to begin
more or less following the wuolo dogs and the goats, who
knew the homeward trail better than their new herdsmen
did. Amid the older boys’ scornful laughter, Kunta and the
others kept grabbing at their headloads to keep them from

falling off. The sight of the village had never been prettier to
Kunta, who was bone-weary by now, but no sooner had
they stepped inside the village gates when the older boys
set up a terrific racket, yelling out warnings and instructions
and jumping around so that all of the adults within view and
hearing would know that they were doing their job and that
their day of training these clumsy younger boys had been a
most trying experience for them. Kunta’s headload
somehow safely reached the yard of Brima Cesay, the
arafang, whose education of Kunta and his new kafo would
begin the next morning.
Just after breakfast, the new herdsmen—each, with
pride, carrying a cottonwood writing slate, a quill, and a
section of bamboo cane containing soot to mix with water
for ink—trooped anxiously into the schoolyard. Treating
them as if they were even more stupid than their goats, the
arafang ordered the boys to sit down. Hardly had he uttered
the words when he began laying about among them with his
limber stick, sending them scrambling— their first
obedience to his command not having come as quickly as
he wanted. Scowling, he further warned them that for as
long as they would attend his classes, anyone who made
so much as a sound, unless asked to speak, would get
more of the rod—he brandished it fiercely at them—and be
sent home to his parents. And the same would be dealt out
to any boy who was ever late for his classes, which would
be held after breakfast and again just after their return with
the goats.
“You are no longer children, and you have responsibilities
now,” said the arafang. “See to it that you fulfill them.” With
these disciplines established, he announced that they
would begin that evening’s class with his reading certain
verses of the Koran, which they would be expected to
memorize and recite before proceeding to other things.
Then he excused them, as his older students, the former
goatherds, began arriving. They looked even more nervous
than Kunta’s kafo, for this was the day for their final
examinations in Koranic recitations and in the writing of
Arabic, the results of which would bear heavily upon their

being formally advanced into the status of third kafo.
That day, all on their own for the first time in their lives,
Kunta’s kafo managed to get the goats unpenned and
trotting in a ragged line along the trail out to the grazing
area. For a good while to come, the goats probably got
less to eat than usual, as Kunta and his mates chased and
yelled at them every time they took a few steps to a new
clump of grass. But Kunta felt even more hounded than his
herd. Every time he sat down to sort out the meaning of
these changes in his life, there seemed to be something he
had to do, someplace he had to go. What with the goats all
day, the arafang after breakfast and after herding, and then
whatever slingshot practice he could fit in before darkness,
he could never seem to find the time for any serious
thinking any more.

CHAPTER 11
The harvesting of groundnuts and couscous was complete,
and the women’s rice came next. No men helped their
wives; even boys like Sitafa and Kunta didn’t help their
mothers, for rice was women’s work alone. The first light of
dawn found Binta with Jankay Touray and the other women
bending in their ripe fields and chopping off the long golden
stalks, which were left to dry for a few days on the walkway
before being loaded into canoes and taken to the village,
where the women and their daughters would stack their
neat bundles in each family’s storehouse. But there was no
rest for the women even when the rice harvesting was
done, for then they had to help the men to pick the cotton,
which had been left until last so that it would dry as long as
possible under the hot sun and thus make better thread for
the women’s sewing.
With everyone looking forward to Juffure’s annual sevenday harvest festival, the women hurried now to make new
clothes for their families. Though Kunta knew better than to
show his irritation, he was forced for several evenings to
tend his talky, pesty little brother Lamin while Binta spun her
cotton. But Kunta was happy again when she took him with
her to the village weaver, Dembo Dibba, whom Kunta
watched in fascination as her rickety hand-and-foot loom
wove the spindles of thread into strips of cotton cloth. Back
at home, Binta let Kunta trickle water through wood ashes
to make the strong lye into which she mixed finely pounded
indigo leaves to dye her cloth deep blue. All of Juffure’s
women were doing the same, and soon their cloth was
spread across low bushes to dry, festooning the village with
splashes of rich color—red, green, and yellow as well as
blue.
While the women spun and sewed, the men worked
equally hard to finish their own appointed tasks before the
harvest festival—and before the hot season made heavy
work impossible. The village’s tall bamboo fence was

patched where it was sagging or broken from the backscratching of the goats and bullocks. Repairs were made
on mud huts that had been damanged by the big rains, and
new thatching replaced the old and worn. Some couples,
soon to marry, required new homes, and Kunta got the
chance to join the other children in stomping water-soaked
dirt into the thick, smooth mud that the men used to mold
walls for the new huts.
Since some muddy water had begun to appear in the
buckets that were pulled up from the well, one of the men
climbed down and found that the small fish that was kept in
the well to eat insects had died in the murky water. So it
was decided that a new well must be dug. Kunta was
watching as the men reached shoulder depth in the new
hole, and passed upward several egg-sized lumps of a
greenish-white clay. They were taken immediately to those
women of the village whose bellies were big, and eaten
eagerly. That clay, Binta told him, would give a baby
stronger bones.
Left to themselves, Kunta, Sitafa, and their mates spent
most of their free hours racing about the village playing
hunter with their new slingshots. Shooting at nearly
everything—and fortunately hitting almost nothing—the
boys made enough noise to scare off a forest of animals.
Even the smaller children of Lamin’s kafo romped almost
unattended, for no one in Juffure was busier than the old
grandmothers, who worked often now until late at night to
supply the demands of the village’s unmarried girls for
hairpieces to wear at the harvest festival. Buns, plaits, and
full wigs were woven of long fibers picked carefully from
rotting sisal leaves or from the soaked bark of the baobab
tree. The coarser sisal hairpieces cost much less than
those made from the softer, silkier fiber of the baobab
whose weaving took so much longer that a full wig might
cost as much as three goats. But the customers always
haggled long and loudly, knowing that the grandmothers
charged less if they enjoyed an hour or so of good, tongueclacking bargaining before each sale.
Along with her wigs, which were especially well made,

old Nyo Boto pleased every woman in the village with her
noisy defiance of the ancient tradition that decreed women
should always show men the utmost of respect. Every
morning found her squatted comfortably before her hut,
stripped to the waist, enjoying the sun’s heat upon her
tough old hide and busily weaving hairpieces—but never so
busily that she failed to notice every passing man. “Hah!”
she would call out, “Look at that! They call themselves men!
Now, in my day, men were men!” And the men who passed
—expecting what always came—would all but run to
escape her tongue, until finally Nyo Boto fell asleep in the
afternoon, with her weaving in her lap and the toddlers in
her care laughing at her loud snoring.
The second-kafo girls, meanwhile, were helping their
mothers and big sisters to collect bamboo baskets full of
ripe medicinal roots and cooking spices, which they spread
under the sun to dry. When grains were being pounded, the
girls brushed away the husks and chaff. They helped also
with the family washing, beating against rocks the soiled
clothing that had been lathered with the rough, reddish
soap the mothers had made from lye and palm oil.
The men’s main work done—only a few days before the
new moon that would open the harvest festival in all of The
Gambia’s villages—the sounds of musical instruments
began to be heard here and there in Juffure. As the village
musicians practiced on their twenty-four-stringed koras,
their drums, and their balafons—melodious instruments
made of gourds tied beneath wooden blocks of various
lengths that were struck with mallets—little crowds would
gather around them to clap and listen. While they played,
Kunta and Sitafa and their mates, back from their
goatherding, would troop about blowing bamboo flutes,
ringing bells, and rattling dried gourds.
Most men relaxed now, talking and squatting about in the
shade of the baobab. Those of Omoro’s age and younger
kept respectfully apart from the Council of Elders, who were
making their annual prefestival decisions on important
village business. Occasionally two or three of the younger
men would rise, stretch themselves, and go ambling about

the village with their small fingers linked loosely in the ageold yayo manner of African men.
But a few of the men spent long hours alone, patiently
carving on pieces of wood of different sizes and shapes.
Kunta and his friends would sometimes even put aside
their slings just to stand watching as the carvers created
terrifying and mysterious expressions on masks soon to be
worn by festival dancers. Others carved human or animal
figures with the arms and legs very close to the body, the
feet flat, and the heads erect.
Binta and the other women snatched what little relaxation
they could around the village’s new well, where they came
every day for a cool drink and a few minutes of gossip. But
with the festival now upon them, they still had much to do.
Clothing had to be finished, huts to be cleaned, dried foods
to be soaked, goats to be slaughtered for roasting. And
above all, the women had to make themselves look their
very best for the festival.
Kunta thought that the big tomboyish girls he had so often
seen scampering up trees looked foolish now, the way they
went about acting coy and fluttery. They couldn’t even walk
right. And he couldn’t see why the men would turn around to
watch them—clumsy creatures who couldn’t even shoot a
bow and arrow if they tried.
Some of these girls’ mouths, he noticed, were swelled up
to the size of a fist, where the inner lips had been pricked
with thorns and rubbed black with soot. Even Binta, along
with every other female in the village over twelve rains old,
was nightly boiling and then cooling a broth of freshly
pounded fudano leaves in which she soaked her feet—and
the pale palms of her hands—to an inky blackness. When
Kunta asked his mother why, she told him to run along. So
he asked his father, who told him, “The more blackness a
woman has, the more beautiful she is.”
“But why?” asked Kunta.
“Someday,” said Omoro, “you will understand.”

CHAPTER 12
Kunta leaped up when the tobalo sounded at dawn. Then
he, Sitafa, and their mates were running among grown-ups
to the silk-cotton tree, where the village drummers were
already pounding on the drums, barking and shouting at
them as if they were live things, their hands a blur against
the taut goatskins. The gathering crowd of costumed
villagers, one by one, soon began to respond with slow
movements of their arms, legs, and bodies, then faster and
faster, until almost everyone had joined the dancing.
Kunta had seen such ceremonies for many plantings and
harvests, for men leaving to hunt, for weddings, births, and
deaths, but the dancing had never moved him—in a way he
neither understood nor was able to resist—as it did now.
Every adult in the village seemed to be saying with his body
something that was in his or her mind alone. Among the
whirling, leaping, writhing people, some of them wearing
masks, Kunta could scarcely believe his eyes when he saw
tough old Nyo Boto suddenly shrieking wildly, jerking both
of her hands before her face, then lurching backward in fear
at some unseen terror. Snatching up an imaginary burden,
she thrashed and kicked the air until she crumpled down.
Kunta turned this way and that, staring at different people
he knew among the dancers. Under one of the horrifying
masks, Kunta recognized the alimamo, flinging and winding
himself again and again like some serpent around a tree
trunk. He saw that some of those he had heard were even
older than Nyo Boto had left their huts, stumbling out on
spindly legs, their wrinkled arms flapping, their rheumy eyes
squinting in the sun, to dance a few unsteady steps. Then
Kunta’s eyes widened as he caught sight of his own father.
Omoro’s knees were churning high, his feet stomping up
dust. With ripping cries, he reared backward, muscles
trembling, then lunged forward, hammering at his chest,
and went leaping and twisting in the air, landing with heavy
grunts.

The pounding heartbeat of the drums seemed to throb
not only in Kunta’s ears but also in his limbs. Almost without
his knowing it, as if it were a dream, he felt his body begin
to quiver and his arms to flail, and soon he was springing
and shouting along with the others, whom he had ceased to
notice. Finally he stumbled and fell, exhausted.
He picked himself up and walked with weak knees to the
sidelines—feeling a deep strangeness that he had never
known before. Dazed, frightened, and excited, he saw not
only Sitafa but also others of their kafo out there dancing
among the grown-ups, and Kunta danced again. From the
very young to the very old, the villagers danced on through
the entire day, they and the drummers stopping for neither
food nor drink but only to catch fresh breath. But the drums
were still beating when Kunta collapsed into sleep that
night.
The festival’s second day began with a parade for the
people of honor just after the noon sun. At the head of the
parade were the arafang, the alimamo, the senior elders,
the hunters, the wrestlers, and those others whom the
Council of Elders had names for their important deeds in
Juffure since the last harvest festival. Everyone else came
trailing behind, singing and applauding, as the musicians
led them out in a snaking line beyond the village. And when
they made a turn around the travelers’ tree, Kunta and his
kafo dashed ahead, formed their own parade, and then
trooped back and forth past the marching adults,
exchanging bows and smiles as they went, stepping briskly
in time with their flutes, bells, and rattles. The parading boys
took turns at being the honored person; when it was
Kunta’s turn, he pranced about, lifting his knees high,
feeling very important indeed. In passing the grown-ups, he
caught both Omoro’s and Binta’s eyes and knew they were
proud of their son.
The kitchen of every woman in the village offered a
variety of food in open invitation to anyone who passed by
and wished to stop a moment and enjoy a plateful. Kunta
and his kafo gorged themselves from many calabashes of
delicious stews and rice. Even roasted meats—goats and

game from the forest—were in abundance; and it was the
young girls’ special duty to keep bamboo baskets filled with
every available fruit.
When they weren’t stuffing their bellies, the boys darted
out to the travelers’ tree to meet the exciting strangers who
now entered the village. Some stayed overnight, but most
tarried only a few hours before moving on to the next
village’s festival. The visiting Senegalese set up colorful
displays with bolts of decorated cloth. Others arrived with
heavy sacks of the very best-quality Nigerian kola nuts, the
grade and size of each determining the price. Traders
came up the bolong in boats laden with salt bars to
exchange for indigo, hides, beeswax, and honey. Nyo Boto
was herself now busily selling—for a cowrie shell apiece—
small bundles of cleaned and trimmed lemongrass roots,
whose regular rubbing against the teeth kept the breath
sweet and the mouth fresh.
Pagan traders hurried on past Juffure, not even stopping,
for their wares of tobacco and snuff and mead beer were
for infidels only, since the Moslem Mandinkas never drank
nor smoked. Others who seldom stopped, bound as they
were for bigger villages, were numerous footloose young
men from other villages—as some young men had also left
Juffure during the harvest season. Spotting them as they
passed on the path beyond the village, Kunta and his
mates would run alongside them for a while trying to see
what they carried in their small bamboo headbaskets.
Usually it was clothing and small gifts for new friends whom
they expected to meet in their wanderings, before returning
to their home villages by the next planting season.
Every morning the village slept and awakened to the
sound of drums. And every day brought different traveling
musicians—experts on the Koran, the balafon, and the
drums. And if they were flattered enough by the gifts that
were pressed upon them, along with the dancing and the
cheers and clapping of the crowds, they would stop and
play for a while before moving on to the next village.
When the story-telling griots came, a quick hush would
fall among the villagers as they sat around the baobab to

hear of ancient kings and family clans, of warriors; of great
battles, and of legends of the past. Or a religious griot
would shout prophecies and warnings that Almighty Allah
must be appeased, and then offer to conduct the necessary
—and by now, to Kunta, familiar—ceremonies in return for
a small gift. In his high voice, a singing griot sang endless
verses about the past splendors of the kingdoms of Ghana,
Songhai, and Old Mali, and when he finished, some people
of the village would often privately pay him to sing the
praises of their own aged parents at their huts. And the
people would applaud when the old ones came to their
doorways and stood blinking in the bright sunshine with
wide, toothless grins. His good deeds done, the singing
griot reminded everyone that a drumtalk message—and a
modest offering—would quickly bring him to Juffure any
time to sing anyone’s praises at funerals, weddings, or
other special occasions. And then he hurried on to the next
village.
It was during the harvest festival’s sixth afternoon when
suddenly the sound of a strange drum cut through Juffure.
Hearing the insulting words spoken by the drum, Kunta
hurried outside and joined the other villagers as they
gathered angrily beside the baobab. The drum, obviously
quite nearby, had warned of oncoming wrestlers so mighty
that any so-called wrestlers in Juffure should hide. Within
minutes, the people of Juffure cheered as their own drum
sharply replied that such foolhardy strangers were asking to
get crippled, if not worse.
The villagers rushed now to the wrestling place. As
Juffure’s wrestlers slipped into their brief dalas with the
rolled-cloth handholds on the sides and buttocks, and
smeared themselves with a slippery paste of pounded
baobab leaves and wood ashes, they heard the shouts that
meant that their challengers had arrived. These powerfully
built strangers never glanced at the jeering crowd. Trotting
behind their drummer, they went directly to the wrestling
area, clad already in their dalas, and began rubbing one
another with their own slippery paste. When Juffure’s
wrestlers appeared behind the village drummers, the

crowd’s shouting and jostling became so unruly that both
drummers had to implore them to remain calm.
Then both drums spoke: “Ready!” The rival teams paired
off, each two wrestlers crouching and glaring, face to face.
“Take hold! Take hold!” the drums ordered, and each pair
of wrestlers began a catlike circling. Both of the drummers
now went darting here and there among the stalking men;
each drummer was pounding out the names of that village’s
ancestral champion wrestlers, whose spirits were looking
on.
With lightning feints, one after another pair finally seized
hold and began to grapple. Soon both teams struggled
amid the dust clouds, their feet kicked up, nearly hiding
them from the wildly yelling spectators. Dogfalls or slips
didn’t count; a victory came only when one wrestler pulled
another off balance, thrust him bodily upward, and hurled
him to the ground. Each time there came a fall—first one of
Juffure’s champions, then one of the challengers—the
crowd jumped and screamed, and a drummer pounded out
that winner’s name. Just beyond the excited crowd, of
course, Kunta and his mates were wrestling among
themselves.
At last it was over, and Juffure’s team had won by a
single fall. They were awarded the horns and hooves of a
freshly slaughtered bullock. Big chunks of the meat were
put to roast over a fire, and the brave challengers were
invited warmly to join the feasting. The people
congratulated the visitors on their strength, and unmarried
maidens tied small bells around all of the wrestlers’ ankles
and upper arms. And during the feasting that followed,
Juffure’s third-kafo boys swept and brushed to smoothness
the wrestling area’s reddish dust to prepare it for a
seoruba.
The hot sun had just begun to sink when the people again
assembled around the wrestling area, now all dressed in
their best. Against a low background of drums, both
wrestling teams leaped into the ring and began to crouch
and spring about, their muscles rippling and their little bells
tinkling as the onlookers admired their might and grace.

The drums suddenly pounded hard; now the maidens ran
out into the ring, weaving coyly among the wrestlers as the
people clapped. Then the drummers began to beat their
hardest and fastest rhythm—and the maidens’ feet kept
pace.
One girl after another, sweating and exhausted, finally
stumbled from the ring, flinging to the dust her colorfully
dyed tiko headwrap. All eyes watched eagerly to see if the
marriageable man would pick up that tiko, thus showing his
special appreciation of that maiden’s dance—for it could
mean he meant soon to consult her father about her bridal
price in goats and cows. Kunta and his mates, who were
too young to understand such things, thought the excitement
was over and ran off to play with their slingshots. But it had
just begun, for a moment later, everyone gasped as a tiko
was picked up by one of the visiting wrestlers. This was a
major event—and a happy one—but the lucky maiden
would not be the first who was lost through marriage to
another village.

CHAPTER 13
On the final morning of the festival, Kunta was awakened by
the sound of screams. Pulling on his dundiko, he went
dashing out, and his stomach knotted with fright. Before
several of the nearby huts, springing up and down,
shrieking wildly and brandishing spears, were half a dozen
men in fierce masks, tall head-dresses, and costumes of
leaf and bark. Kunta watched in terror as one man entered
each hut with a roar and emerged jerking roughly by the
arm a trembling boy of the third kafo.
Joined by a cluster of his own equally terrified secondkafo mates, Kunta peered with wide eyes around the
corner of a hut. A heavy white cotton hood was over the
head of each third-kafo boy. Spying Kunta, Sitafa, and their
group of little boys, one of the masked men dashed toward
them waving his spear and shouting fearfully. Though he
stopped short and turned back to his hooded charge, the
boys scattered, squealing in horror. And when all of the
village’s third-kafo boys had been collected, they were
turned over to slaves, who took them by the hand and led
them, one by one, out the village gate.
Kunta had heard that these older boys were going to be
taken away from Juffure for their manhood training, but he
had no idea that it would happen like this. The departure of
the third-kafo boys, along with the men who would conduct
their manhood training, cast a shadow of sadness upon the
entire village. In the days that followed, Kunta and his mates
could talk of nothing but the terrifying things they had seen,
and of the even more terrifying things they had overheard
about the mysterious manhood training. In the mornings, the
arafang rapped their heads for their lack of interest in
memorizing the Koranic verses. And after school, trooping
along behind their goats out into the bush, Kunta and his
mates each tried not to think about what each could not
forget—that he would be among Juffure’s next group of
hooded boys jerked and kicked out through the village

gate.
They all had heard that a full twelve moons would pass
before those third-kafo boys would return to the village—but
then as men. Kunta said that someone had told him that the
boys in manhood training got beatings daily. A boy named
Karamo said they were made to hunt wild animals for food;
and Sitafa said they were sent out alone at night into the
deep forest, to find their own way back. But the worst thing,
which none of them mentioned, although it made Kunta
nervous each time he had to relieve himself, was that
during the manhood training a part of his foto would be cut
off. After a while, the more they talked, the idea of manhood
training became so frightening that the boys stopped
talking about it, and each of them tried to conceal his fears
within himself, not wanting to show that he wasn’t brave.
Kunta and his mates had gotten much better at
goatherding since their first anxious days out in the bush.
But they still had much to learn. Their job, they were
beginning to discover, was hardest in the mornings, when
swarms of biting flies kept the goats bolting this way and
that, quivering their skins and switching their stubby tails as
the boys and the dogs rushed about trying to herd them
together again. But before noon, when the sun grew so hot
that even the flies sought cooler places, the tired goats
settled down to serious grazing, and the boys could finally
enjoy themselves.
By now they were crack shots with their slingshots—and
also with the new bows and arrows their fathers had given
them on graduating to the second kafo—and they spent an
hour or so killing every small creature they could find: hares,
ground squirrels, bush rats, lizards, and one day a tricky
spurfowl that tried to decoy Kunta away from her nest by
dragging a wing as if it had been injured. In the early
afternoon, the boys skinned and cleaned the day’s game,
rubbing the insides with the salt they always carried, and
then, building a fire, roasted themselves a feast.
Each day out in the bush seemed to be hotter than the
day before. Earlier and earlier, the insects stopped biting
the goats to look for shade, and the goats bent down on

their knees to get at the short grass that remained green
beneath the parched taller grass. But Kunta and his mates
hardly noticed the heat. Glistening with sweat, they played
as if each day were the most exciting one in their lives. With
their bellies tight after the afternoon meal, they wrestled or
raced or sometimes just yelled and made faces at one
another, taking turns at keeping a wary eye on the grazing
goats. Playing at war, the boys clubbed and speared each
other with thick-rooted weeds until someone held up a
handful of grass as a sign of peace. Then they cooled off
their warrior spirits by rubbing their feet with the contents of
the stomach of a slaughtered rabbit; they had heard in the
grandmothers’ stories that real warriors used the stomach
of a lamb.
Sometimes Kunta and his mates romped with their
faithful wuolo dogs, which Mandinkas had kept for
centuries, for they were known as one of the very finest
breeds of hunting and guard dogs in all of Africa. No man
could count the goats and cattle that had been saved on
dark nights from killer hyenas by the howling of the wuolos.
But hyenas weren’t the game stalked by Kunta and his
mates when they played at being huntsmen. In their
imaginations, as they crept about in the tall, sun-baked
grass of the savanna, their quarry were rhinoceros,
elephant, leopard, and the mighty lion.
Sometimes, as a boy followed his goats around in their
search for grass and shade, he would find himself
separated from his mates. The first few times it happened
to him, Kunta herded up his goats as quickly as he could
and headed back to be near Sitafa. But soon he began to
like these moments of solitude, for they gave him the
chance to stalk some great beast by himself. It was no
ordinary antelope, leopard, or even lion that he sought in his
daydreaming; it was that most feared and dangerous of all
beasts—a maddened buffalo.
The one he tracked had spread so much terror
throughout the land that many hunters had been sent to kill
the savage animal, but they had managed only to wound it,
and one after another, it had gored them with its wicked

horns. Even more bloodthirsty than before with its painful
wound, the buffalo had then charged and killed several
farmers from Juffure who had been working on their fields
outside the village. The famed simbon Kunta Kinte had
been deep in the forest, smoking out a bee’s nest to
sustain his energy with rich honey, when he heard the
distant drumtalk begging him to save the people of the
village of his birth. He could not refuse.
Not even a blade of the dry grass crackled under his feet,
so silently did he stalk for signs of the buffalo’s trail, using
the sixth sense that told master simbons which way animals
would travel. And soon he found the tracks he sought; they
were larger than any he had ever seen. Now trotting silently,
he drew deeply into his nostrils the foul smell that led him to
giant, fresh buffalo dung. And maneuvering now with all the
craft and skill at his command, simbon Kinte finally spotted
the huge bulk of the beast himself—it would have been
concealed from ordinary eyes—hiding in the dense, high
grass.
Straining back his bow, Kinte took careful aim—and sent
the arrow thudding home. The buffalo was badly wounded
now, but more dangerous than ever. Springing suddenly
from side to side, Kinte evaded the beast’s desperate,
stricken charge and braced himself as it wheeled to charge
again. He fired his second arrow only when he had to leap
aside at the last instant—and the huge buffalo crashed
down dead.
Kinte’s piercing whistle brought from hiding, awed and
trembling, those previous hunters who had failed where he
had gloriously succeeded. He ordered them to remove the
huge hide and horns and to summon still more men to help
drag the carcass all the way back to Juffure. The joyously
shouting people had laid down a pathway of hides within
the village gate so that Kinte would not get dust upon his
feet. “Simbon Kinte!” the talking drum beat out. “Simbon
Kinte!” the children shouted, waving leafy branches above
their heads. Everyone was pushing and shoving and trying
to touch the mighty hunter so that some of his prowess
might rub off on them. Small boys danced around the huge

carcass, reenacting the kill with wild cries and long sticks.
And now, walking toward him from amid the crowd, came
the strongest, most graceful, and most beautifully black of
all the maidens in Juffure—indeed, in all of The Gambia—
and kneeling before him, she offered a calabash of cool
water; but Kinte, not thirsty, merely wet his fingers, to favor
her, whereupon she drank that water with happy tears, thus
showing to everyone the fullness of her love.
The clamoring crowd was spreading—making way for
aged, wrinkled, gray-headed Omoro and Binta, who came
tottering against their canes. The simbon permitted his old
mother to embrace him while Omoro looked on, eyes filled
with pride. And the people of Juffure chanted “Kinte! Kinte!”
Even the dogs were barking their acclaim.
Was that his own wuolo dog barking? “Kinte! Kinte!”
Was that Sitafa yelling frantically? Kunta snapped out of it
just in time to see his forgotten goats bounding toward
someone’s farm. Sitafa and his other mates and their dogs
helped to herd them up again before any damage was
done, but Kunta was so ashamed that a whole moon went
by before he drifted off into any more such daydreams.

CHAPTER 14
As hot as the sun already was, the five long moons of the
dry A season had only begun. The heat devils shimmered,
making objects larger in the distance, and the people
sweated in their huts almost as much as they did in the
fields. Before Kunta left home each morning for his
goatherding, Binta saw that he protected his feet well with
red palm oil, but each afternoon, when he returned to the
village from the open bush, his lips were parched and the
soles of his feet were dry and cracked by the baking earth
beneath them. Some of the boys came home with bleeding
feet, but out they would go again each morning—
uncomplaining, like their fathers—into the fierce heat of the
dry grazing land, which was even worse than in the village.
By the time the sun reached its zenith, the boys and their
dogs and the goats all lay panting in the shade of scrub
trees, the boys too tired to hunt and roast the small game
that had been their daily sport. Mostly, they just sat and
chatted as cheerfully as they could, but somehow by this
time the adventure of goatherding had lost some of its
excitement.
It didn’t seem possible that the sticks they gathered every
day would be needed to keep them warm at night, but once
the sun set, the air turned as cold as it had been hot. And
after their evening meal, the people of Juffure huddled
around their crackling fires. Men of Omoro’s age sat talking
around one fire, and a little distance away was the fire of
the elders. Around still another sat the women and the
unmarried girls, apart from the old grandmothers, who told
their nightly stories to the little first-kafo children around a
fourth fire.
Kunta and the other second-kafo boys were too proud to
sit with the naked first kafo of Lamin and his mates, so they
squatted far enough away not to seem part of that noisy,
giggling group—yet near enough to hear the old
grandmother’s stories, which still thrilled them as much as

ever. Sometimes Kunta and his mates eavesdropped on
those at other fires; but the conversations were mostly
about the heat. Kunta heard the old men recalling times
when the sun had killed plants and burned crops; how it had
made the well go stale, or dry, of times when the heat had
dried the people out like husks. This hot season was bad,
they said, but not as bad as many they could remember. It
seemed to Kunta that older people always could remember
something worse.
Then, abruptly one day, breathing the air was like
breathing flames, and that night the people shivered
beneath their blankets with the cold creeping into their
bones. Again the next morning, they were mopping their
faces and trying to draw a full breath. That afternoon the
harmattan wind began. It wasn’t a hard wind, nor even a
gusty wind, either of which would have helped. Instead it
blew softly and steadily, dusty and dry, day and night, for
nearly half a moon. As it did each time it came, the constant
blowing of the harmattan wore away slowly at the nerves of
the people of Juffure. And soon parents were yelling more
often than usual at their children, and whipping them for no
good reason. And though bickering was unusual among the
Mandinkas, hardly a daytime hour passed without loud
shoutings between some adults, especially between
younger husbands and wives like Omoro and Binta.
Suddenly then nearby doorways would fill with people
watching as the couple’s mothers went rushing into that hut.
A moment later the shouting would grow louder, and next a
rain of sewing baskets, cooking pots, calabashes, stools,
and clothes would be hurled out the door. Then, bursting out
themselves, the wife and her mother would snatch up the
possessions and go storming off to the mother’s hut.
After about two moons, just as it had begun, the
harmattan suddenly stopped. In less than a day, the air
became still, the sky clear. Within one night, a parade of
wives slipped back in with their husbands, and their
mothers-in-law were exchanging small gifts and patching
up arguments all over the village. But the five long moons of
the dry season were only half over. Though food was still

plentiful in the storehouses, the mothers only cooked small
quantities, for no one, not even the usually greedy children,
felt like eating much. Everyone was sapped of strength by
the sun’s heat, and the people talked less and went about
doing only the things they had to do.
The hides of the gaunt cattle in the village were broken by
lumpy sores where biting flies had laid their eggs. A
quietness had come upon the scrawny chickens that
normally ran squawking around the village, and they lay in
the dust on their sides, with their wings fanned out and their
beaks open. Even the monkeys now were seldom seen or
heard, for most of them had gone into the forest for more
shade. And the goats, Kunta noticed, grazing less and less
in the heat, had grown nervous and thin.
For some reason—perhaps it was the heat, or perhaps
simply because they were growing older—Kunta and his
goatherding mates, who had spent every day together out
in the bush for almost six moons, now began to drift off
alone with their own small herds. It had happened for
several days before Kunta realized that he had never
before been completely away from other people for any real
length of time. He looked across at other boys and their
goats in the distance, scattered across the silence of the
sunbaked bush. Beyond them lay the fields where the
farmers were chopping the weeds that had grown in the
moons since the last harvest. The tall piles of weeds they
raked to dry under the sun seemed to wave and shimmer in
the heat.
Wiping the sweat from his brow, it seemed to Kunta that
his people were always enduring one hardship or another
—something uncomfortable or difficult, or frightening, or
threatening to life itself. He thought about the burning, hot
days and the cold nights that followed them. And he thought
about the rains that would come next, turning the village into
a mudhole and finally submerging the walking paths until
the people had to travel in their canoes from place to place
where usually they walked. They needed the rain as they
needed the sun, but there always seemed to be too much
or too little. Even when the goats were fat and the trees

were heavy with fruit and blossoms, he knew that would be
the time when the last rain’s harvest would run out in the
family storehouses and that this would bring the hungry
season, with people starving and some even dying, like his
own dearly remembered Grandma Yaisa.
The harvest season was a happy one—and after that, the
harvest festival—but it was over so soon, and then the long,
hot dry season would come again, with its awful harmattan,
when Binta kept shouting at him and beating on Lamin—
until he almost felt sorry for his pest of a small brother. As
he herded his goats back toward the village, Kunta
remembered the stories he had heard so many times when
he was as young as Lamin, about how the forefathers had
always lived through great fears and dangers. As far back
as time went, Kunta guessed, the lives of the people had
been hard. Perhaps they always would be.
Each evening in the village now, the alimamo led the
prayers for Allah to send the rains. And then one day,
excitement filled Juffure when some gentle winds stirred up
the dust—for those winds meant that the rains were soon to
come. And the next morning, the people of the village
gathered out in the fields, where the farmers set afire the
tall piles of weeds they had raked up, and thick smoke
coiled up over the fields. The heat was nearly unbearable,
but the sweating people danced and cheered, and the firstkafo children went racing and whooping about, each trying
to catch good-luck pieces of drifting, feathery flakes of
ashes.
The next day’s light winds began to sift the loose ashes
over the fields, enriching the soil to grow yet another crop.
The farmers now began chopping busily with their hoes,
preparing the long rows to receive the seeds—in this
seventh planting time through which Kunta had lived in the
endless cycle of the seasons.

CHAPTER 15
Two rains had passed, and Binta’s belly was big again,
and her temper was even shorter than usual. So quick was
she to whack both her sons, in fact, that Kunta was grateful
each morning when goatherding let him escape her for a
few hours, and when he returned in the afternoon, he
couldn’t help feeling sorry for Lamin, who was only old
enough to get into mischief and get beaten but not old
enough to get out of the house alone. So one day when he
came home and found his little brother in tears, he asked
Binta—not without some misgivings—if Lamin could join
him on an errand, and she snapped “Yes!” Naked little
Lamin could hardly contain his happiness over this amazing
act of kindness, but Kunta was so disgusted with his own
impulsiveness that he gave him a good kick and a cuffing
as soon as they got beyond Binta’s earshot. Lamin hollered
—and then followed his brother like a puppy.
Every afternoon after that, Kunta found Lamin waiting
anxiously at the door in hopes that his big brother would
take him out again. Kunta did, nearly every day—but not
because he wanted to. Binta would profess such great
relief at getting some rest from both of them that Kunta now
feared a beating if he didn’t take Lamin along. It seemed
as if a bad dream had attached his naked little brother to
Kunta’s back like some giant leech from the bolong. But
soon Kunta began to notice that some of the kafo mates
also had small brothers tagging along behind them. Though
they would play off to one side or dart about nearby, they
always kept a sharp eye on their big brothers, who did their
best to ignore them. Sometimes the big boys would dash
off suddenly, jeering back at the young ones as they
scrambled to catch up with them. When Kunta and his
mates climbed trees, their little brothers, trying to follow,
usually tumbled back to the ground, and the older boys
would laugh loudly at their clumsiness. It began to be fun
having them around.

Alone with Lamin, as he sometimes was, Kunta might
pay his brother a bit more attention. Pinching a tiny seed
between his fingers, he would explain that Juffure’s giant
silk-cotton tree grew from a thing that small. Catching a
honeybee, Kunta would hold it carefully for Lamin to see the
stinger; then, turning the bee around, he would explain how
bees sucked the sweetness from flowers and used it to
make honey in their nests in the tallest trees. And Lamin
began to ask Kunta a lot of questions, most of which he
would patiently answer. There was something nice about
Lamin’s feeling that Kunta knew everything. It made Kunta
feel older than his eight rains. In spite of himself, he began
to regard his little brother as something more than a pest.
Kunta took great pains not to show it, of course, but
returning homeward now each afternoon with his goats, he
really looked forward to Lamin’s eager reception. Once
Kunta thought that he even saw Binta smile as he and
Lamin left the hut. In fact, Binta would often snap at her
younger son, “Have your brother’s manners!” The next
moment, she might whack Kunta for something, but not as
often as she used to. Binta would also tell Lamin that if he
didn’t act properly, he couldn’t go with Kunta, and Lamin
would be very good for the rest of the day.
He and Lamin would always leave the hut now walking
very politely, hand in hand, but once outside, Kunta went
dashing and whooping—with Lamin racing behind him—to
join the other second- and first-kafo boys. During one
afternoon’s romping, when a fellow goatherd of Kunta’s
happened to run into Lamin, knocking him on his back,
Kunta was instantly there, shoving that boy roughly aside
and exclaiming hotly, “That’s my brother!” The boy
protested and they were ready to exchange blows when the
others grabbed their arms. Kunta snatched the crying
Lamin by the hand and jerked him away from their staring
playmates. Kunta was both deeply embarrassed and
astonished at himself for acting as he had toward his own
kafo mate—and especially over such a thing as a sniffling
little brother. But after that day, Lamin began openly trying
to imitate whatever he saw Kunta do, sometimes even with

Binta or Omoro looking on. Though he pretended not to like
it, Kunta couldn’t help feeling just a little proud.
When Lamin fell from a low tree he was trying to climb
one afternoon, Kunta showed him how to do it right. At one
time or another, he taught his little brother how to wrestle
(so that Lamin could win the respect of a boy who had
humiliated him in front of his kafo mates); how to whistle
through his fingers (though Lamin’s best whistle was
nowhere near as piercing as Kunta’s); and he showed him
the kind of berry leaves from which their mother liked to
make tea. And he cautioned Lamin to take the big, shiny
dung beetles they always saw crawling in the hut and set
them gently outside on the ground, for it was very bad luck
to harm them. To touch a rooster’s spur, he told him, was
even worse luck. But however hard he tried, Kunta couldn’t
make Lamin understand how to tell the time of day by the
position of the sun. “You’re just too little, but you’ll learn.”
Kunta would still shout at him sometimes, if Lamin seemed
too slow in learning something simple; or he would give him
a slap if he was too much of a pest. But he would always
feel so badly about it that he might even let the naked
Lamin wear his dundiko for a while.
As he grew closer to his brother, Kunta began to feel less
deeply something that had often bothered him before—the
gulf between his eight rains and the older boys and men of
Juffure. Indeed, scarcely a day of his life that he could
remember had ever passed without something to remind
him that he was still of the second kafo—one who yet slept
in the hut of his mother. The older boys who were away now
at manhood training had always had nothing but sneers and
cuffings for those of Kunta’s age. And the grown men, such
as Omoro and the other fathers, acted as if a second-kafo
boy were something merely to be tolerated. As for the
mothers, well, often when Kunta was out in the bush, he
would think angrily that whenever he got to be a man, he
certainly intended to put Binta in her place as a woman—
although he did intend to show her kindness and
forgiveness, since after all, she was his mother.
Most irritating of all to Kunta and his mates, though, was

how the second-kafo girls with whom they had grown up
were now so quick to remind them that they were thinking
already of becoming wives. It rankled Kunta that girls
married at fourteen rains or even younger, while boys didn’t
get married until they were men of thirty rains or more. In
general, being of the second kafo had always been an
embarrassment to Kunta and his mates, except for their
afternoons off by themselves in the bush, and in Kunta’s
case, his new relationship with Lamin.
Every time he and his brother would be walking
somewhere by themselves, Kunta would imagine that he
was taking Lamin on some journey, as men sometimes did
with their sons. Now, somehow, Kunta felt a special
responsibility to act older, with Lamin looking up to him as
a source of knowledge. Walking alongside, Lamin would
ply Kunta with a steady stream of questions.
“What’s the world like?”
“Well,” said Kunta, “no man or canoes ever journeyed so
far. And no one knows all there is to know about it.”
“What do you learn from the arafang?”
Kunta recited the first verses of the Koran in Arabic and
then said, “Now you try.” But when Lamin tried, he got badly
confused—as Kunta had known he would—and Kunta said
paternally, “It takes time.”
“Why does no one harm owls?”
“Because all our dead ancestors’ spirits are in owls.”
Then he told Lamin something of their late Grandma Yaisa.
“You were just a baby, and cannot remember her.”
“What’s that bird in the tree?”
“A hawk.”
“What does he eat?”
“Mice and other birds and things.”
“Oh.”
Kunta had never realized how much he knew—but now
and then Lamin asked something of which Kunta knew
nothing at all
“Is the sun on fire?” Or: “Why doesn’t our father sleep with
us?”
At such times, Kunta would usually grunt, then stop

talking—as Omoro did when he tired of so many of Kunta’s
questions. Then Lamin would say no more, since Mandinka
home, training taught that one never talked to another who
did not want to talk. Sometimes Kunta would act as if he
had gone into deep private thought. Lamin would sit silently
nearby, and when Kunta rose, so would he. And
sometimes, when Kunta didn’t know the answer to a
question, he would quickly do something to change the
subject.
Always, at his next chance, Kunta would wait until Lamin
was out of the hut and then ask Binta or Omoro the answer
he needed for Lamin. He never told them why he asked
them both so many questions, but it seemed as if they
knew. In fact, they seemed to act as if they had begun to
regard Kunta as an older person, since he had taken on
more responsibility with his little brother. Before long, Kunta
was speaking sharply to Lamin in Binta’s presence about
things done wrongly. “You must talk clearly!” he might say
with a snap of his fingers. Or he might whack Lamin for not
jumping swiftly enough to do anything his mother had
ordered him to do. Binta acted as if she neither saw nor
heard.
So Lamin made few moves now without either his
mother’s or his brother’s sharp eyes upon him. And Kunta
now had only to ask Binta or Omoro any questions of
Lamin’s and they immediately told him the answer.
“Why is father’s bullock’s hide mat of that red color? A
bullock isn’t red.”
“I dyed the hide of the bullock with lye and crushed millet,”
replied Binta.
“Where does Allah live?”
“Allah lives where the sun comes from,” said Omoro.

CHAPTER 16
“What are slaves?” Lamin asked Kunta one afternoon.
Kunta grunted and fell silent. Walking on, seemingly lost in
thought, he was wondering what Lamin had overheard to
prompt that question. Kunta knew that those who were
taken by toubob became slaves, and he had overheard
grown-ups talking about slaves who were owned by people
in Juffure. But the fact was that he really didn’t know what
slaves were. As had happened so many other times,
Lamin’s question embarrassed him into finding out more.
The next day, when Omoro was getting ready to go out
after some palm wood to build Binta a new food
storehouse, Kunta asked to join his father; he loved to go
off anywhere with Omoro. But neither spoke this day until
they had almost reached the dark, cool palm grove.
Then Kunta asked abruptly, “Fa, what are slaves?”
Omoro just grunted at first, saying nothing, and for
several minutes moved about, in the grove, inspecting the
trunks of different palms.
“Slaves aren’t always easy to tell from those who aren’t
slaves,” he said finally. Between blows of his bush ax
against the palm he had selected, he told Kunta that slaves’
huts were roofed with nyantang jongo and free people’s
huts with nyantang foro, which Kunta knew was the best
quality of thatching grass.
“But one should never speak of slaves in the presence of
slaves,” said Omoro, looking very stern. Kunta didn’t
understand why, but he nodded as if he did.
When the palm tree fell, Omoro began chopping away its
thick, tough fronds. As Kunta plucked off for himself some
of the ripened fruits, he sensed his father’s mood of
willingness to talk today. He thought happily how now he
would be able to explain to Lamin all about slaves.
“Why are some people slaves and others not?” he
asked.
Omoro said that people became slaves in different ways.

Some were born of slave mothers—and he named a few of
those who lived in Juffure, people whom Kunta knew well.
Some of them were the parents of some of his own kafo
mates. Others, said Omoro, had once faced starvation
during their home villages’ hungry season, and they had
come to Juffure and begged to become the slaves of
someone who agreed to feed and provide for them. Still
others—and he named some of Juffure’s older people—
had once been enemies and been captured as prisoners.
“They become slaves, being not brave enough to die rather
than be taken,” said Omoro.
He had begun chopping the trunk of the palm into
sections of a size that a strong man could carry. Though all
he had named were slaves, he said, they were all
respected people, as Kunta well knew. “Their rights are
guaranteed by the laws of our forefathers,” said Omoro,
and he explained that all masters had to provide their
slaves with food, clothing, a house, a farm plot to work on
half shares, and also a wife or husband.
“Only those who permit themselves to be are despised,”
he told Kunta—those who had been made slaves because
they were convicted murderers, thieves, or other criminals.
These were the only slaves whom a master could beat or
otherwise punish, as he felt they deserved.
“Do slaves have to remain slaves always?” asked Kunta.
“No, many slaves buy their freedom with what they save
from farming on half share with their masters.” Omoro
named some in Juffure who had done this. He named
others who had won their freedom by marrying into the
family that owned them.
To help him carry the heavy sections of palm, Omoro
made a stout sling out of green vines, and as he worked, he
said that some slaves, in fact, prospered beyond their
masters. Some had even taken slaves for themselves, and
some had become very famous persons.
“Sundiata was one!” exclaimed Kunta. Many times, he
had heard the grandmothers and the griots speaking of the
great fore-father slave general whose army had conquered
so many enemies.

Omoro grunted and nodded, clearly pleased that Kunta
knew this, for Omoro also had learned much of Sundiata
when he was Kunta’s age. Testing his son, Omoro asked,
“And who was Sundiata’s mother?”
“Sogolon, the Buffalo Woman!” said Kunta proudly.
Omoro smiled, and hoisting onto his strong shoulders
two heavy sections of the palm pole within the vine sling, he
began walking. Eating his palm fruits, Kunta followed, and
nearly all the way back to the village, Omoro told him how
the great Mandinka Empire had been won by the crippled,
brilliant slave general whose army had begun with runaway
slaves found in swamps and other hiding places.
“You will learn much more of him when you are in
manhood training,” said Omoro—and the very thought of
that time sent a fear through Kunta, but also a thrill of
anticipation.
Omoro said that Sundiata had run away from his hated
master, as most slaves did who didn’t like their masters.
He said that except for convicted criminals, no slaves could
be sold unless the slaves approved of the intended master.
“Grandmother Nyo Boto also is a slave,” said Omoro,
and Kunta almost swallowed a mouthful of palm fruit. He
couldn’t comprehend this. Pictures flashed across his mind
of beloved old Nyo Boto squatting before the door of her
hut, tending the village’s twelve or fifteen naked babies
while weaving baskets of wigs, and giving the sharp side of
her tongue to any passing adult—even the elders, if she felt
like it. “That one is nobody’s slave,” he thought.
The next afternoon, after he had delivered his goats to
their pens, Kunta took Lamin home by a way that avoided
their usual playmates, and soon they squatted silently
before the hut of Nyo Boto. Within a few moments the old
lady appeared in her doorway, having sensed that she had
visitors. And with but a glance at Kunta, who had always
been one of her very favorite children, she knew that
something special was on his mind. Inviting the boys inside
her hut, she set about the brewing of some hot herb tea for
them.
“How are your papa and mama?” she asked.

“Fine. Thank you for asking,” said Kunta politely. “And
you are well, Grandmother?”
“I’m quite fine, indeed,” she replied.
Kunta’s next words didn’t come until the tea had been set
before him. Then he blurted, “Why are you a slave,
Grandmother?”
Nyo Boto looked sharply at Kunta and Lamin. Now it was
she who didn’t speak for a few moments. “I will tell you,” she
said finally.
“In my home village one night, very far from here and
many rains ago, when I was a young woman and wife,” Nyo
Boto said, she had awakened in terror as flaming grass
roofs came crashing down among her screaming
neighbors. Snatching up her own two babies, a boy and a
girl, whose father had recently died in a tribal war, she
rushed out among the others—and awaiting them were
armed white slave raiders with their black slatee helpers. In
a furious battle, all who didn’t escape were roughly herded
together, and those who were too badly injured or too old or
too young to travel were murdered before the others’ eyes,
Nyo Boto began to sob, “—including my own two babies
and my aged mother.”
As Lamin and Kunta clutched each other’s hands, she
told them how the terrified prisoners, bound neck-to-neck
with thongs, were beaten and driven across the hot, hard
inland country for many days. And every day, more and
more of the prisoners’ fell beneath the whips that lashed
their backs to make them walk faster. After a few days, yet
more began to fall of hunger and exhaustion. Some
struggled on, but those who couldn’t were left for the wild
animals to get. The long line of prisoners passed other
villages that had been burned and ruined, where the skulls
and bones of people and animals lay among the burned-out
shells of thatch and mud that had once been family huts.
Fewer than half of those who had begun the trip reached
the village of Juffure, four days from the nearest place on
the Kamby Bolongo where slaves were sold.
“It was here that one young prisoner was sold for a bag of
corn,” said the old woman. “That was me. And this was how

I came to be called Nyo Boto,” which Kunta knew meant
“bag of corn.” The man who bought her for his own slave
died before very long, she said, “and I have lived here ever
since.”
Lamin was wriggling in excitement at the story, and
Kunta felt somehow even greater love and appreciation
than he had felt before for old Nyo Boto, who now sat
smiling tenderly at the two boys, whose father and mother,
like them, she had once dandled on her knee.
“Omoro, your papa, was of the first kafo when I came to
Juffure,” said Nyo Boto, looking directly at Kunta. “Yaisa,
his mother, who was your grandmother, was my very good
friend. Do you remember her?” Kunta said that he did and
added proudly that he had told his little brother all about
their grandma.
“That is good!” said Nyo Boto. “Now I must get back to
work. Run along, now.”
Thanking her for the tea, Kunta and Lamin left and
walked slowly back to Binta’s hut, each deep in his own
private thoughts.
The next afternoon, when Kunta returned from his
goatherding, he found Lamin filled with questions about
Nyo Boto’s story. Had any such fire ever burned in Juffure?
he wanted to know. Well, he had never heard of any, said
Kunta, and the village showed no signs of it. Had Kunta
ever seen one of those white people? “Of course not!” he
exclaimed. But he said that their father had spoken of a
time when he and his brothers had seen the toubob and
their ships at a point along the river.
Kunta quickly changed the subject, for he knew very little
about toubob, and he wanted to think about them for
himself. He wished that he could see one of them—from a
safe distance, of course, since everything he’d ever heard
about them made it plain that people were better off who
never got too close to them.
Only recently a girl out gathering herbs—and before her
two grown men out hunting—had disappeared, and
everyone was certain that toubob had stolen them away. He
remembered, of course, how when drums of other villages

warned that toubob had either taken somebody or was
known to be near, the men would arm themselves and
mount a double guard while the frightened women quickly
gathered all of the children and hid in the bush far from the
village—sometimes for several days—until the toubob was
felt to be gone.
Kunta recalled once when he was out with his goats in
the quiet of the bush, sitting under his favorite shade tree.
He had happened to look upward and there, to his
astonishment, in the tree overhead, were twenty or thirty
monkeys huddled along the thickly leaved branches as still
as statues, with their long tails hanging down. Kunta had
always thought of monkeys rushing noisily about, and he
couldn’t forget how quietly they had been watching his every
move. He wished that now he might sit in a tree and watch
some toubob on the ground below him.
The goats were being driven homeward the afternoon
after Lamin had asked him about toubob when Kunta
raised the subject among his fellow goatherds—and in no
time they were telling about the things they had heard. One
boy, Demba Conteh, said that a very brave uncle had once
gone close enough to smell some toubob, and they had a
peculiar stink. All of the boys had heard that toubob took
people away to eat them. But some had heard that the
toubob claimed the stolen people were not eaten, only put
to work on huge farms. Sitafa Silla spat out his
grandfather’s answer to that: “White man’s lie!”
The next chance he had, Kunta asked Omoro, “Papa, will
you tell me how you and your brothers saw the toubob at the
river?” Quickly, he added, “The matter needs to be told
correctly to Lamin.” It seemed to Kunta that his father nearly
smiled, but Omoro only grunted, evidently not feeling like
talking at that moment. But a few days later, Omoro
casually invited both Kunta and Lamin to go with him out
beyond the village to collect some roots he needed. It was
the naked Lamin’s first walk anywhere with his father, and
he was overjoyed. Knowing that Kunta’s influence had
brought this about, he held tightly onto the tail of his big
brother’s dundiko.

Omoro told his sons that after their manhood training, his
two older brothers Janneh and Saloum had left Juffure, and
the passing of time brought news of them as well-known
travelers in strange and distant places. Their first return
home came when drumtalk all the way from Juffure told
them of the birth of Omoro’s first son. They spent sleepless
days and nights on the trail to attend the naming ceremony.
And gone from home so long, the brothers joyously
embraced some of their kafo mates of boyhood. But those
few sadly told of others gone and lost—some in burned
villages, some killed by fearsome firesticks, some
kidnaped, some missing while farming, hunting, or traveling
—and all because of toubob.
Omoro said that his brothers had then angrily asked him
to join them on a trip to see what the toubob were doing, to
see what might be done. So the three brothers trekked for
three days along the banks of the Kamby Bolongo, keeping
carefully concealed in the bush, until they found what they
were looking for. About twenty great toubob canoes were
moored in the river, each big enough that its insides might
hold all the people of Juffure, each with a huge white cloth
tied by ropes to a treelike pole as tall as ten men. Nearby
was an island, and on the island was a fortress.
Many toubob were moving about, and black helpers were
with them, both on the fortress and in small canoes. The
small canoes were taking such things as dried indigo,
cotton, beeswax, and hides to the big canoes. More terrible
than he could describe, however, said Omoro, were the
beatings and other cruelties they saw being dealt out to
those who had been captured for the toubob to take away.
For several moments, Omoro was quiet, and Kunta
sensed that he was pondering something else to tell him.
Finally he spoke: “Not as many of our people are being
taken away now as then.” When Kunta was a baby, he said,
the King of Barra, who ruled this part of The Gambia, had
ordered that there would be no more burning of villages
with the capturing or killing of all their people. And soon it
did stop, after the soldiers of some angry kings had burned
the big canoes down to the water, killing all the toubob on

board.
“Now,” said Omoro, “nineteen guns are fired in salute to
the King of Barra by every toubob canoe entering the
Kamby Bolongo.” He said that the king’s personal agents
now supplied most of the people whom the toubob took
away—usually criminals or debtors, or anyone convicted for
suspicion of plotting against the king—often for little more
than whispering. More people seemed to get convicted of
crimes, said Omoro, whenever toubob ships sailed in the
Kamby Bolongo looking for slaves to buy.
“But even a king cannot stop the stealings of some
people from their villages,” Omoro continued. “You have
known some of those lost from our village, three from
among us just within the past few moons, as you know, and
you have heard the drumtalk from other villages.” He looked
hard at his sons, and spoke slowly. “The things I’m going to
tell you now, you must hear with more than your ears—for
not to do what I say can mean your being stolen away
forever!” Kunta and Lamin listened with rising fright. “Never
be alone when you can help it,” said Omoro. “Never be out
at night when you can help it. And day or night, when you’re
alone, keep away from any high weeds or bush if you can
avoid it.”
For the rest of their lives, “even when you have come to
be men,” said their father, they must be on guard for
toubob. “He often shoots his firesticks, which can be heard
far off. And wherever you see much smoke away from any
villages, it is probably his cooking fires, which are too big.
You should closely inspect his signs to learn which way the
toubob went. Having much heavier footsteps than we do, he
leaves signs you will recognize as not ours: He breaks
twigs and grasses. And when you get close where he has
been, you will find that his scent remains there. It’s like a
wet chicken smells. And many say a toubob sends forth a
nervousness that we can feel. If you feel that, become quiet,
for often he can be detected at some distance.”
But it’s not enough to know the toubob, said Omoro.
“Many of our own people work for him. They are slatee
traitors. But without knowing them, there is no way to

recognize them. In the bush, therefore, trust no one you
don’t know.”
Kunta and Lamin sat frozen with fear. “You cannot be told
these things strongly enough,” said their father. “You must
know what your uncles and I saw happening to those who
had been stolen. It is the difference between slaves among
ourselves and those whom toubob takes away to be slaves
for him.” He said that they saw stolen people chained
inside long, stout, heavily guarded bamboo pens along the
shore of the river. When small canoes brought importantacting toubob from the big canoes, the stolen people were
dragged outside their pens onto the sand.
“Their heads had been shaved, and they had been
greased until they shined all over. First they were made to
squat and jump up and down,” said Omoro. “And then,
when the toubob had seen enough of that, they ordered the
stolen people’s mouths forced open for their teeth and their
throats to be looked at.”
Swiftly, Omoro’s finger touched Kunta’s crotch, and as
Kunta jumped, Omoro said, “Then the men’s foto was
pulled and looked at. Even the women’s private parts were
inspected.” And the toubob finally made the people squat
again and stuck burning hot irons against their backs and
shoulders. Then, screaming and struggling, the people
were shipped toward the water, where small canoes waited
to take them out to the big canoes.
“My brothers and I watched many fall onto their bellies,
clawing and eating the sand, as if to get one last hold and
bite of their own home,” said Omoro. “But they were
dragged and beaten on.” Even in the small canoes out in
the water, he told Kunta and Lamin, some kept fighting
against the whips and the clubs until they jumped into the
water among terrible long fish with gray backs and white
bellies and curved mouths full of thrashing teeth that
reddened the water with their blood.
Kunta and Lamin had huddled close to each other, each
gripping the other’s hands. “It’s better that you know these
things than that your mother and I kill the white cock one day
for you.” Omoro looked at his sons. “Do you know what that

means?”
Kunta managed to nod, arid found his voice. “When
someone is missing, Fa?” He had seen families frantically
chanting to Allah as they squatted around a white cock
bleeding and flapping with its throat slit.
“Yes,” said Omoro. “If the white cock dies on its breast,
hope remains. But when a white cock flaps to death on its
back, then no hope remains, and the whole village joins the
family in crying to Allah.”
“Fa—” Lamin’s voice, squeaky with fear, startled Kunta,
“where do the big canoes take the stolen people?”
“The elders say to Jong Sang Doo,” said Omoro, “a land
where slaves are sold to huge cannibals called toubabo
koomi, who eat us. No man knows any more about it.”

CHAPTER 17
So frightened was Lamin by his father’s talk of slave-taking
and white cannibals that he awakened Kunta several times
that night with his bad dreams. And the next day, when
Kunta returned from goatherding, he decided to turn his
little brother’s mind—and his own—from such thoughts by
telling him about their distinguished uncles.
“Our father’s brothers are also the sons of Kairaba Kunta
Kinte, for whom I am named,” said Kunta proudly. “But our
uncles Janneh and Saloum were born of Sireng,” he said.
Lamin looked puzzled, but Kunta kept on explaining.
“Sireng was our grandfather’s first wife, who died before he
married our Grandma Yaisa.” Kunta arranged twigs on the
ground to show the Kinte family’s different individuals. But
he could see that Lamin still didn’t understand. With a sigh,
he began to talk instead of their uncles’ adventures, which
Kunta himself had thrilled to so often when his father had
told of them.
“Our uncles have never taken wives for themselves
because their love of traveling is so great,” said Kunta. “For
moons on end, they travel under the sun and sleep under
the stars. Our father says they have been where the sun
burns upon endless sand, a land where there is never any
rain.” In another place their uncles had visited, said Kunta,
the trees were so thick that the forests were dark as night
even in the daytime. The people of this place were no taller
than Lamin, and like Lamin, always went naked—even after
they grew up. And they killed huge elephants with tiny,
poisoned darts. In still another place, a land of giants,
Janneh and Saloum had seen warriors who could throw
their hunting spears twice as far as the mightiest Mandinka,
and dancers who could leap higher than their own heads,
which were six hands higher than the tallest man in Juffure.
Before bedtime, as Lamin watched with wide eyes,
Kunta acted out his favorite of all the stories—springing
suddenly about with an imaginary sword slashing up and

down, as if Lamin were one of the bandits whom their
uncles and others had fought off every day on a journey of
many moons, heavily laden with elephants’ teeth, precious
stones, and gold, to the great black city of Zimbabwe.
Lamin begged for more stories, but Kunta told him to go
to sleep. Whenever Kunta had been made to go to bed
after his father told him such tales, he would lie on his mat
—as his little brother now would—with his mind making the
uncles’ stories into pictures. And sometimes Kunta would
even dream that he was traveling with his uncles to all the
strange places, that he was talking with the people who
looked and acted and lived so differently from the
Mandinkas. He had only to hear the names of his uncles
and his heart would quicken.
A few days later, it happened that their names reached
Juffure in a manner so exciting that Kunta could hardly
contain himself. It was a hot, quiet afternoon, and just about
everyone in the village was sitting outside his hut’s doorway
or in the shade of the baobab—when suddenly there came
a sharp burst of drumtalk from the next village. Like the
grown-ups, Kunta and Lamin cocked their heads intently to
read what the drum was saying. Lamin gasped aloud when
he heard his own father’s name. He wasn’t old enough to
understand the rest, so Kunta whispered the news it
brought: Five days of walking in the way the sun rose,
Janneh and Saloum Kinte were building a new village. And
their brother Omoro was expected for the ceremonial
blessing of the village on the second next new moon.
The drumtalk stopped; Lamin was full of questions.
“Those are our uncles? Where is that place? Will our fa go
there?” Kunta didn’t reply. Indeed, as Kunta dashed off
across the village toward the hut of the jaliba, he barely
heard his brother. Other people were already gathering
there—and then came Omoro, with the big-bellied Binta
behind him. Everyone watched as Omoro and the jaliba
spoke briefly, and Omoro gave him a gift. The talking drum
lay near a small fire, where its goatskin head was heating
to extreme tautness. Soon the crowd looked on as the
jaliba’s hands pounded out Omoro’s reply that, Allah willing,

he would be in his brothers’ new village before the second
next new moon. Omoro went nowhere during the next days
without other villagers pressing upon him their
congratulations and their blessings for the new village,
which history would record as founded by the Kinte clan.
It wasn’t many days before Omoro was to depart when
an idea that was almost too big to think about seized upon
Kunta. Was it remotely possible that his papa might let him
share the journey? Kunta could think of nothing else.
Noticing his unusual quietness, Kunta’s fellow goatherds,
even Sitafa, left him alone. And toward his adoring little
brother, he became so short-tempered that even Lamin
drew away, hurt and puzzled. Kunta knew how he was
acting and felt badly, but he couldn’t help himself.
He knew that now and then some lucky boy was allowed
to share a journey with his father, uncle, or grown-up
brother. But he also knew that such boys had never been so
young as his eight rains, except for some fatherless boys,
who got special privileges under the forefathers’ laws. Such
a boy could start following closely behind any man, and the
man would never object to sharing whatever he had—even
if he was on a journey lasting for moons—so long as the
boy followed him at exactly two paces, did everything he
was told, never complained, and never spoke unless
spoken to.
Kunta knew not to let anyone, especially his mother, even
suspect what he dreamed of. He felt certain that not only
would Binta disapprove, but she would also probably forbid
his ever mentioning it again, and that would mean Omoro
would never know how desperately Kunta hoped he could
go. So Kunta knew that his only hope lay in asking Fa
himself—if he could ever catch him alone.
There were soon but three days before Omoro was to
leave, and the watchful, almost despairing Kunta was
herding his goats after breakfast when he saw his father
leaving Binta’s hut. Instantly he began maneuvering his
goats into milling back and forth, going nowhere, until
Omoro had gone on in a direction and to a distance that
Binta surely wouldn’t see. Then, leaving his goats alone,

because he had to take the chance, Kunta ran like a hare
and came to a breathless stop and looked up pleadingly at
his father’s startled face. Gulping, Kunta couldn’t remember
a single thing he had meant to say.
Omoro looked down at his son for a long moment, and
then he spoke. “I have just told your mother,” he said—and
walked on.
It took Kunta a few seconds to realize what his father
meant. “Aieee!” Kunta shouted, not even aware that he had
shouted. Dropping onto his belly, he sprang froglike into the
air—and bolting back to his goats, sent them racing toward
the bush.
When he collected himself enough to tell his fellow
goatherds what had happened, they were so jealous that
they went off by themselves. But by midday they could no
longer resist the chance to share with him the excitement of
such wonderful luck. By that time he had fallen silent with
the realization that ever since the drumtalk message had
come, his father had been thinking about his son.
Late that afternoon, when Kunta raced happily home and
into his mother’s hut, Binta grabbed him without a word and
began to cuff him so hard that Kunta fled, not daring to ask
what he had done. And her manner changed suddenly
toward Omoro in a way that shocked Kunta almost as
much. Even Lamin knew that a woman was absolutely
never allowed to disrespect a man, but with Omoro
standing where he could plainly hear her, Binta loudly
muttered her disapproval of his and Kunta’s traveling in the
bush when the drums of different villages were reporting
regularly of new people missing. Fixing the breakfast
couscous, she pounded the pestle into the mortar so
furiously that the sound was like drums.
As Kunta was hurrying out of the hut the next day—to
avoid another whacking—Binta commanded Lamin to stay
behind and began to kiss and pat and hug him as she
hadn’t done since he was a baby. Lamia’s eyes told Kunta
his embarrassment, but there was nothing either of them
could do about it.
When Kunta was outside the hut away from his mother,

practically every adult who saw him offered congratulations
upon his being Juffure’s youngest boy ever given the honor
of sharing an elder’s long journey. Modestly, Kunta said,
“Thank you,” reflecting his proper home-training—but once
out in the bush beyond the sight of grown-ups, he pranced
under an extra-large headbundle he had brought along to
show his mates how well he balanced it—and would
balance it the next morning when he strutted past the
travelers’ tree behind his father. It fell to the ground three
times before he took as many steps.
On his way homeward, with many things he wanted to do
around the village before leaving, Kunta felt a strange pull to
visit old Nyo Boto before doing anything else. After
delivering his goats, he escaped from Binta’s hut as quickly
as he could and went to squat before Nyo Boto’s. Shortly
she appeared in her doorway. “I have expected you,” she
said, inviting him inside. As usual, whenever Kunta visited
her alone, the two of them just sat quietly for a while. He had
always liked and looked forward to that feeling. Although he
was very young and she was very old, they still felt very
close to each other, just sitting there in the dim hut, each of
them thinking private thoughts.
“I have something for you,” said Nyo Boto finally. Moving
to the dark pouch of cured bullock’s hide that hung from the
wall by her bed, she withdrew a dark saphie charm of the
kind that encircled one’s upper arm. “Your grandfather
blessed this charm when your father went to manhood
training,” said Nyo Boto. “It was blessed for the manhood
training of Omoro’s first son—yourself. Your Grandma
Yaisa left it with me for when your manhood training would
start. And that is really this journey with your fa.” Kunta
looked with love at the dear old grandmother, but he
couldn’t think of a right way to say how the saphie charm
would make him feel that she was with him no matter how
far away he went.
The next morning, returning from prayers at the mosque,
Omoro stood waiting impatiently as Binta took her time
completing the adjustment of Kunta’s headload. When
Kunta had laid awake too filled with excitement to sleep

through the night, he had heard her sobbing. Then suddenly
she was hugging Kunta so hard that he could feel her body
trembling, and he knew, more than ever before in his life,
how much his mother really loved him.
With his friend Sitafa, Kunta had carefully reviewed and
practiced what he and his father now did: First Omoro and
then Kunta made two steps out into the dust beyond the
doorway of his hut. Then, stopping and turning and bending
down, they scraped up the dust of their first footprints and
put it into their hunters’ bags, thus insuring that their
footprints would return to that place.
Binta watched, weeping, from her hut’s doorway,
pressing Lamin against her big belly, as Omoro and Kunta
walked away. Kunta started to turn for a last look—but
seeing that his father didn’t, kept his eyes front and
marched on, remembering that it wasn’t proper for a man to
show his emotions. As they walked through the village, the
people they passed spoke to them and smiled, and Kunta
waved at his kafo mates, who had delayed their rounding
up of the goats in order to see him off. He knew they
understood that he didn’t return their spoken greetings
because any talking now was taboo for him. Reaching the
travelers’ tree, they stopped, and Omoro added two more
narrow cloth strips to the weather-tattered hundreds already
hanging from the lower limbs, each strip representing the
prayer of a traveler that his journey would be safe and
blessed.
Kunta couldn’t believe it was really happening. It was the
first time in his life he would spend a night away from his
mother’s hut, the first time he would ever go farther from the
gates of Juffure than one of his goats had strayed, the first
time—for so many things. While Kunta was thus
preoccupied, Omoro had turned and without a word or a
backward glance, started walking very fast down the path
into the forest. Almost dropping his headload, Kunta raced
to catch up with him.

CHAPTER 18
Kunta found himself nearly trotting to keep the proper two
paces behind Omoro. He saw that almost two of his quick,
short steps were necessary for each long, smooth stride of
his father. After about an hour of this, Kunta’s excitement
had waned almost as much as his pace. His headbundle
began to feel heavier and heavier, and he had a terrible
thought: Suppose he grew so tired he couldn’t keep up?
Fiercely, he told himself he would drop in his tracks before
that would happen.
Here and there, as they passed, snuffling wild pigs would
go rushing into the underbush, and partridges would whir
up, and rabbits would bound for cover. But Kunta wouldn’t
have paid an elephant much attention in his determination
to keep up with Omoro. The mucles below Kunta’s knees
were beginning to ache a little. His face was sweating, and
so was his head; he could tell by the way his bundle began
sliding off balance, a little bit one way or the other, and he
kept having to put both his hands up there to readjust it.
Ahead, after a while, Kunta saw that they were
approaching the travelers’ tree of some small village. He
wondered what village it was; he was sure he would know
its name if his father said it, but Omoro had neither spoken
nor looked back ever since they left Juffure. A few minutes
later, Kunta saw dashing out to meet them—as he himself
had once done—some naked children of the first kafo.
They were waving and hallooing, and when they got closer,
he could see their eyes widen at the sight of one so young
traveling with his father.
“Where are you going?” they chattered, scampering on
either side of Kunta. “Is he your fa?” “Are you Mandinka?”
“What’s your village?” Weary as he was, Kunta felt very
mature and important, ignoring them just as his father was
doing.
Near every travelers’ tree, the trail would fork, one
leading on into the village and the other past it, so that a

person with no business there could pass on by without
being considered rude. As Omoro and Kunta took the fork
that passed by this village, the little children exclaimed
unhappily, but the grown-ups seated under the village
baobab only threw glances at the travelers, for holding
everyone’s attention was a griot whom Kunta could hear
loudly orating about the greatness of Mandinkas. There
would be many griots, praise singers, and musicians at the
blessing of his uncles’ new village, Kunta thought.
The sweat began to run into Kunta’s eyes, making him
blink to stop the stinging. Since they had begun walking, the
sun had crossed only half the sky, but his legs already hurt
so badly, and his headload had become so heavy, that he
began to think he wasn’t going to make it. A feeling of
panic was rising in him when Omoro suddenly stopped and
swung his headload to the ground alongside a clear pool at
the side of the trail. Kunta stood for a moment trying to
control his unsteady legs. He clutched his headbundle to
take it down, but it slipped from his fingers and fell with a
bump. Mortified, he knew his father had heard—but Omoro
was on his knees drinking from the spring, without a sign
that his son was even there.
Kunta hadn’t realized how thirsty he was. Hobbling over
to the water’s edge, he kneeled down to drink—but his legs
refused the position. After trying again in vain, he finally lay
down on his stomach, braced himself on his elbows, and
managed to lower his mouth to the water.
“Just a little.” It was the first time his father had spoken
since they left Juffure, and it shocked Kunta. “Swallow a
little, wait, then a little more.” For some reason, he felt angry
toward his father. “Yes, Fa,” he intended to say, but no
sound came. He sipped some cool water and swallowed it.
Making himself wait, he wanted to collapse. After sipping a
little more, he sat up and rested beside the pool. The
thought passed through his mind that manhood training
must be something like this. And then, sitting upright, he
drifted off to sleep.
When he awakened with a start—how long had it been?
—Omoro was nowhere to be seen. Jumping up, Kunta saw

the big headload under a nearby tree; so his father wouldn’t
be far away. As he began to look around, he realized how
sore he was. He shook himself and stretched. The muscles
hurt, but he felt much better than he had. Kneeling for a few
more gulps of water from the spring, Kunta noticed his
reflection in the still surface of the pool—narrow black face
with wide eyes and mouth. Kunta smiled at himself, then
grinned with all his teeth showing. He couldn’t help
laughing, and as he looked up—there was Omoro standing
at his side. Kunta sprang up, embarrassed but his father’s
attention seemed to be on other things.
In the shade of some trees, neither of them speaking a
word, as the monkeys chattered and the parrots screeched
above their heads, they ate some of the bread from their
headloads, along with the four plump wood pigeons Omoro
had shot with his bow and roasted while Kunta slept. As
they ate, Kunta told himself that the first time there was any
chance, he was going to show his father how well he too
could kill and cook food, the way he and his kafo mates did
out in the bush.
When they finished eating, the sun was three-fourths
across the sky, so it wasn’t as hot when the headloads
were retied and readjusted on their heads and they set out
on the trail once again.
“Toubob brings his canoes one day of walking from
here,” said Omoro when they had gone a good distance.
“Now is daytime when we can see, but we must avoid high
bush and grass, which can hide surprises.” Omoro’s fingers
touched his knife sheath and his bow and arrows. “Tonight
we must sleep in a village.”
With his father, he need not fear, of course, but Kunta felt
a flash of fright after a lifetime of hearing people and drums
tell of disappearances and stealings. As they walked on—a
little faster now—Kunta noticed hyena dung on the trail, its
color lily-white because hyenas with their strong jaws
cracked and ate so many bones. And beside the path, their
approach caused a herd of antelope to stop eating and
stand like statues, watching until the humans had passed
by.

“Elephants!” said Omoro a little later, and Kunta saw the
surrounding trampled bush, the young saplings stripped to
bare bark and limbs, and some half-uprooted trees the
elephants had leaned on to push the topmost tender leaves
downward where they could reach them with their trunks.
Since elephants never grazed near villages and people,
Kunta had seen only a few of them in his life, and then only
from a great distance. They had been among the
thousands of forest animals that ran together, sounding like
thunder, ahead of frightening black smoke clouds when a
great fire had swept across the brushland once when Kunta
was very young; but Allah’s rain had put it out before it
harmed Juffure or any other nearby villages.
As they trudged along the seemingly endless trail, it
occurred to Kunta that just as people’s walking feet made
trails, so did spiders spin the long, thin threads they
traveled on. Kunta wondered if Allah willed matters for the
insects and the animals as He did for people; it surprised
him to realize he never had thought about that before. He
wished he could ask Omoro about it right now. He was
even more surprised that Lamin hadn’t asked him about it,
for Lamin had asked him about even smaller matters than
insects. Well, he would have much to tell his little brother
when he returned to Juffure—enough to fill days out in the
bush with his fellow goatherds for moons to come.
It seemed to Kunta that he and Omoro were entering a
different kind of country than the one where they lived. The
sinking sun shone down on heavier grasses than he had
ever seen before, and among the familiar trees were large
growths of palm and cactus. Apart from the biting flies, the
only flying things he saw here were not pretty parrots and
birds such as those that squawked and sang around
Juffure, but circling hawks in search of prey and vultures
hunting for food already dead.
The orange ball of the sun was nearing the earth when
Omoro and Kunta sighted a thick trail of smoke from a
village up ahead. As they reached the travelers’ tree, even
Kunta could tell that something wasn’t right. Very few prayer
strips hung from the limbs, showing that few of those who

lived here ever left their village and that most travelers from
other villages had taken the trail that passed it by. Alas, no
children came running out to meet them.
As they passed by the village baobab, Kunta saw that it
was partly burned. Over half of the mud huts he could see
were empty; trash was in the yards; rabbits were hopping
about; and birds were bathing in the dust. The people of the
village—most of them leaning or lying about in the
doorways of their huts—were almost all old or sick, and a
few crying babies seemed to be the only children. Kunta
saw not a person of his age—or even as young as Omoro.
Several wrinkled old men weakly received the travelers.
The eldest among them, rapping his walking stick, ordered
a toothless old woman to bring the travelers water and
couscous; maybe she’s a slave, thought Kunta. Then the
old men began interrupting each other in their haste to
explain what had happened to the village. Slave takers one
night had stolen or killed all of their younger people, “from
your rains to his!” One old man pointed at Omoro, then at
Kunta. “We old they spared. We ran away into the forest.”
Their abandoned village had begun going to pieces
before they could bring themselves to return. They had no
crops yet, and not much food or strength. “We will die out
without our young people,” said one of the old men. Omoro
had listened closely as they talked, and his words were
slow as he spoke: “My brother’s village, which is four days
distant, will welcome you, grandfathers.”
But all of them began shaking their heads as the oldest
said: “This is our village. No other well has such sweet
water. No other trees’ shade is as pleasant. No other
kitchens smell of the cooking of our women.”
The old men apologized that they had no hospitality hut to
offer. Omoro assured them that he and his son enjoyed
sleeping under the stars. And that night, after a simple meal
of bread from their headloads, which they shared with the
villagers, Kunta lay on his pallet of green, springy boughs,
and thought about all he had heard. Suppose it had been
Juffure, with everybody he knew dead or taken away—
Omoro, Binta, Lamin, and himself too, and the baobab

burned, and the yards filled with trash. Kunta made himself
think about something else.
Then, suddenly, in the darkness, he heard the shrieks of
some forest creature caught by some ferocious animal, and
he thought about people catching other people. In the
distance he could also hear the howling of hyenas—but
rainy season or dry, hungry or harvest, every night of his life,
he had heard hyenas howling somewhere. Tonight he found
their familiar cry almost comforting as he finally drifted off to
sleep.

CHAPTER 19
In the first light of dawn, Kunta came awake, springing onto
his feet. Standing beside his pallet was a queer old woman
demanding in a high, cracked voice to know what had
happened to the food she had sent him for two moons ago.
Behind Kunta, Omoro spoke softly: “We wish we could tell
you, Grandmother.”
As they hurried on beyond the village after washing and
eating, Kunta remembered an old woman in Juffure who
would totter about, peering closely into anyone’s face and
telling him happily, “My daughter arrives tomorrow!” Her
daughter had disappeared many rains before, everyone
knew, and the white cock had died on its back, but all those
she stopped would gently agree, “Yes, Grandmother—
tomorrow.”
Before the sun was very high, they saw ahead a lone
figure walking toward them on the trail. They had passed
two or three other travelers the day before—exchanging
smiles and greetings—but this old man, drawing near,
made it clear that he wanted to talk. Pointing from the
direction he had come, he said, “You may see a toubob.”
Behind Omoro, Kunta nearly stopped breathing. “He has
many people carrying his headloads.” The old man said the
toubob had seen him and stopped him, but only sought help
in finding out where the river began. “I told him the river
begins farthest from where it ends.”
“He meant you no harm?” asked Omoro.
“He acted very friendly,” said the old man, “but the cat
always eats the mouse it plays with.”
“That’s the truth!” said Omoro.
Kunta wanted to ask his father about this strange toubob
who came looking for rivers rather than for people; but
Omoro had bade farewell to the old man and was walking
off down the footpath—as usual, without a glance to see if
Kunta was behind him. This time Kunta was glad, for
Omoro would have seen his son holding onto his headload

with both hands while he ran painfully to catch up. Kunta’s
feet had begun to bleed, but he knew it would be unmanly to
take notice of it, let alone mention it to his father.
For the same reason, Kunta swallowed his terror when,
later that day, they rounded a turn and came upon a family
of lions—a big male, a beautiful female, and two half-grown
cubs—lounging in a meadow very near the path. To Kunta,
lions were fearsome, slinking animals that would tear apart
a goat that a boy permitted to stray too far in its grazing.
Omoro slowed his pace, and without taking his eyes from
the lions, said quietly, as if sensing his son’s fear, “They
don’t hunt or eat at this time of the day unless they’re
hungry. These are fat.” But he kept one hand on his bow
and the other by his quiver of arrows as they passed by.
Kunta held his breath but kept walking, and he and the lions
watched each other until they were out of sight
He would have continued to think about them, and about
the toubob, also somewhere in the area, but his aching legs
wouldn’t let him. By that night, he would have ignored twenty
lions if they had been feeding at the place Omoro chose for
them to spend the night. Kunta had barely lain down on his
bed of soft branches before he was into a deep sleep—
and it seemed only minutes before his father was shaking
him awake in the early dawn. Though he felt as if he hadn’t
slept at all, Kunta watched with unconcealed admiration
how swiftly Omoro skinned, cleaned, and roasted their
morning meal of two hares, which he had caught in night
snares. As Kunta squatted and ate the tasty meat, he
thought how he and his goatherding mates used up hours
of catching and cooking game, and he wondered how his
father and other men ever found time to ever learn so much
—about everything there was to know, it seemed.
His blistered feet, and his legs, and his back, and his
neck all began to hurt again this third day on the trail—in
fact, his whole body seemed to be one dull ache—but he
pretended that manhood training had already begun and
that he would be the last boy in his kafo to betray his pain.
When he stepped on a sharp thorn just before midday,
Kunta bravely bit his lip to avoid crying out, but he began to

limp and fall so far behind that Omoro decided to let him
rest for a few minutes beside the path while they ate their
afternoon meal. The soothing paste his father rubbed into
the wound made it feel better, but soon after they began
walking again, it began to hurt—and bleed—in earnest.
Before long, however, the wound was filled with dirt, so the
bleeding stopped, and the constant walking numbed the
pain enough to let him keep up with his father. Kunta
couldn’t be sure, but it seemed to him that Omoro had
slowed down a tiny bit. The area around the wound was
ugly and swollen by the time they stopped that night, but his
father applied another poultice, and in the morning it looked
and felt good enough to bear his weight without too much
pain.
Kunta noticed with relief, as they set out the next day, that
they had left behind the thorn and cactus land they had
been traveling through and were moving into bush country
more like Juffure’s, with even more trees and thickly
flowering plants, and more chattering monkeys and
multicolored landbirds than he had ever seen before.
Breathing in the fragrant air made Kunta remember times
when he had taken his little brother to catch crabs down
along the banks of the bolong, where he and Lamin would
wait to wave at their mother and the other women rowing
homeward after work in their rice fields.
Omoro took the bypass fork at every travelers’ tree, but
each village’s first-kafo children always raced out to meet
them and to tell the strangers whatever happened to be the
most exciting of the local news. In one such village, the little
couriers rushed out yelling, “Mumbo jumbo! Mumbo
jumbo!,” and considering their job done, fled back inside
the village gate. The bypassing trail went near enough for
Omoro and Kunta to see the townspeople watching a
masked and costumed figure brandishing a rod over the
bare back of a screaming woman whom several other
women held. All of the women spectators were shrieking
with each blow of the rod. From discussions with his fellow
goatherds, Kunta knew how a husband, if enough annoyed
by a quarrelsome, troublemaking wife, could go quietly to

another village and hire a mumbo jumbo to come to his
village and shout fearsomely at intervals from concealment,
then appear and publicly discipline that wife, after which all
of the village’s women were apt to act better for a time.
At one travelers’ tree, no children came out to meet the
Kintes. In fact, there was no one to be seen at all, and not a
sound was to be heard in the silent village, except for the
birds and monkeys. Kunta wondered if slave takers had
come here, too. He waited in vain for Omoro to explain the
mystery, but it was the chattering children of the next village
who did so. Pointing back down the trail, they said that
village’s chief had kept on doing things his people disliked
until one night not long ago, as he slept, everyone had
quietly gone away with all their possessions to the homes
of friends and families in other places—leaving behind an
“empty chief,” the children said, who was now going about
promising to act better if only his people would return.
Since nighttime was near, Omoro decided to enter this
village, and the crowd under the baobab was abuzz with
this exciting gossip: Most felt certain that their new
neighbors would return home after they had taught their
chief his lesson for a few more days. While Kunta stuffed
his stomach with groundnut stew over steamed rice, Omoro
went to the village jaliba and arranged for a talking-drum
message to his brothers. He told them to expect him by the
next sundown and that traveling with him was his first son.
Kunta had sometimes daydreamed about hearing his
name drum-sounding across the land, and now it had
happened. It wouldn’t leave his ears. Later, on the
hospitality hut’s bamboo bed, bone-weary as he was,
Kunta thought of the other jalibas hunched over their drums
pounding out his name in every village along their route to
the village of Janneh and Saloum.
At every travelers’ tree now, since the drums had spoken,
were not only the usual naked children but also some elders
and musicians. And Omoro couldn’t refuse a senior elder’s
request to grant his village the honor of at least a brief visit.
As the Kintes freshened themselves in each hospitality hut
and then sat down to share food and drink in the shade of

the baobab and silk-cotton trees, the adults gathered
eagerly to hear Omoro’s answers to their questions, and
the first, second, and third kafos clustered about Kunta.
While the first kafo stared at him in silent awe, those of
Kunta’s rains and older, painfully jealous, asked him
respectful questions about his home village and his
destination. He answered them gravely with, he hoped, the
same dignity as his father did their fathers’ questions. By
the time they left, he was sure the villagers felt they had
seen a young man who had spent most of his life traveling
with his father along The Gambia’s long trails.

CHAPTER 20
They had tarried so long at the last village that they would
have to walk faster and harder to reach their destination by
sundown, as Omoro had promised his brothers. Though he
sweated and ached, Kunta found it easier than before to
keep his headload balanced, and he felt a new spurt of
strength with each of the drumtalk messages that now filled
the air with word of the arrival of griots, jahbas, senior
elders, and other important people in the town ahead, each
representing such distant home villages as Karantaba,
Kootacunda, Pisania, and Jonkakonda, most of which
Kunta had never heard of: A griot from the Kingdom of
Wooli was there, said the drums, and even a prince sent by
his father, the King of Barra. As Kunta’s cracked feet
padded quickly along the hot, dusty trail, he was amazed at
how famous and popular his uncles were. Soon he was all
but running, not only to keep close behind the ever more
rapidly striding Omoro, but also because these past few
hours seemed to be taking forever.
Finally, just as the sun began to turn crimson on the
western horizon, Kunta spotted smoke rising from a village
not far ahead. The wide, circular pattern of the smoke told
Kunta that dried baobab hulls were being burned to drive
away mosquitoes. That means the village was entertaining
important visitors. He felt like cheering. They had arrived!
Soon he began to hear the thunder of a big ceremonial
tobalo drum—being pounded, he guessed, as each new
personage entered between the village gates. Intermingling
was the throb of smaller tan-tang drums and the shriekings
of dancers. Then the trail made a turn, and there under the
rising smoke was the village. And alongside a bushy
growth they saw a man who caught sight of them at the
same instant and began to point and wave as if he had
been posted there to await an oncoming man with a boy.
Omoro waved back at the man, who immediately squatted
over his drum and announced on it: “Omoro Kinte and first

son—”
Kunta’s feet scarcely felt the ground. The travelers’ tree,
soon in sight, was festooned with cloth strips, and the
original single-file trail had already been widened by many
feet—evidence of an already popular and busy village. The
pounding of the tan-tangs grew louder and louder, and
suddenly the dancers appeared, grunting and shouting in
their leaf-and-bark costumes, leaping and whirling and
stamping out through the village gate ahead of everyone
else, all of them rushing to meet the distinguished visitors.
The village’s deep-voiced tobalo began to boom as two
figures came running through the crowd. Ahead of Kunta,
Omoro’s headbundle dropped suddenly to the ground, and
Omoro was running toward them. Before he knew it,
Kunta’s own headbundle had dropped and he was running
too.
The two men and his father were hugging and pounding
each other. “And this is our nephew?” Both men yanked
Kunta off his feet and embraced him amid exclamations of
joy. Sweeping them on to the village, the huge welcoming
party cried out their greetings all around them, but Kunta
saw and heard no one but his uncles. They certainly
resembled Omoro, but he noticed that they were both
somewhat shorter, stockier, and more muscular than his
father. The older uncle Janneh’s eyes had a squinting way
of seeming to look a long distance, and both men moved
with an almost animal quickness. They also talked much
more rapidly than his father as they plied him with questions
about Juffure and about Binta.
Finally, Saloum thumped his fist on Kunta’s head. “Not
since he got his name have we been together. And now
look at him! How many rains have you, Kunta?”
“Eight, sir,” he answered politely.
“Nearly ready for manhood training!” exclaimed his uncle.
All around the village’s tall bamboo fence, dry
thornbushes were piled up, and concealed among them
were sharp-pointed stakes to cripple any marauding animal
or human. But Kunta wasn’t noticing such things, and the
few others of around his age who were there he saw only

out of the corners of his eyes. He scarcely heard the racket
of the parrots and monkeys above their heads, or the
barking of the wuolo dogs underfoot, as the uncles took
them on a tour of their beautiful new village. Every hut had
its own private yard, said Saloum, and every woman’s dryfoods storehouse was mounted directly over her cooking
fire, so the smoke would keep her rice, couscous, and
millet free of bugs.
Kunta almost got dizzy jerking his head toward this or
that exciting sight, smell, or sound. It was both fascinating
and confusing to overhear people speaking in Mandinka
dialects that he couldn’t understand beyond an occasional
word. Like the rest of the Mandinkas—except for those as
learned as the arafang—Kunta knew next to nothing of the
languages of other tribes, even of those who lived nearby.
But he had spent enough time around the travelers’ tree to
know which tribes were which. The Fulas had oval faces,
longer hair, thinner lips, and sharper features, with vertical
scars on their temples. The Wolof were extremely black
and very reserved, the Serahuli lighter-skinned and small in
stature. And the Jolas—there was no mistaking them—
scarred their entire bodies, and their faces always seemed
to wear a ferocious expression.
Kunta recognized people from all of these tribes here in
the new village, but there were even more he didn’t
recognize. Some were haggling loudly with traders as they
hawked their wares. Older women clamored over tanned
hides, and younger women bargained for hairpieces made
from sisal and baobab. The cry “Kola! Fine purple kola!”
drew a cluster of those whose few remaining teeth were
already orange-stained from chewing the nuts.
Amid friendly elbowing and pushing, Omoro was
introduced to an endless stream of villagers and important
persons from exciting places. Kunta marveled at his uncles’
fluent talking in the strange tongues they spoke. Letting
himself drift into the shifting throng, knowing that he could
find his father and uncles whenever he wanted to, Kunta
soon found himself among the musicians who were playing
for all who felt like dancing. Next he sampled the roast

antelope and beef and the groundnut stew that the village
women kept bountifully supplied on tables in the baobabs’
shade for anyone who wanted it. It was all right as food
went, Kunta thought, but not as tasty as the succulent
harvest-festival dishes prepared by the mothers of Juffure.
Seeing some women over by the well talking excitedly
about something, Kunta sidled over, his ears as wide as
his eyes, and heard that a very great marabout was
reported to be only about half a day’s travel away on the
trail, journeying with his party to honor the new village, since
it had been founded by sons of the late holy man Kairaba
Kunta Kinte. Kunta was thrilled anew to hear his own
grandfather spoken of so reverently. Unrecognized by any
of the women, he heard them chatter next about his uncles.
It was time they traveled less and settled down to have
wives and sons, one woman said. “The only trouble they will
have,” said another, “is so many maidens eager to be their
wives.”
It was almost dark when Kunta, feeling very awkward,
finally approached some boys of around his own age. But
they didn’t seem to mind that he had hung around the
grown-ups until now. Mostly, they seemed anxious to tell
Kunta how their new village had come to be. “All of our
families became your uncles’ friends somewhere during
their travels,” said one boy. All of them had been
dissatisfied with their lives where they were, for one reason
or another. “My grandfather didn’t have enough space for all
his family and his children’s families to be close to him,” a
boy said. “Our bolong wouldn’t grow good rice,” said
another.
His uncles, Kunta heard, began telling friends they knew
an ideal place where they were thinking of building a
village. And the families of Janneh and Saloum’s friends
were soon on the trail with their goats, chickens, pets,
prayer rugs, and other possessions.
Soon it was dark and Kunta watched as the fires of the
new village were lit with the sticks and branches that his
new friends had collected earlier in the day. Because it was
a time of celebration, they told him all the villagers and

visitors would sit together around several fires, instead of
the usual custom, which dictated that the men and the
women and children would sit at separate fires. The
alimamo would bless the gathering, they said, and then
Janneh and Saloum would walk inside the circle to tell
stories about their travels and adventures. In the circle with
them would be the oldest visitor to the village, a senior
elder from the distant upper-river of Fulladu. It was
whispered that he had over a hundred rains, and would
share his wisdom with all who had ears to hear.
Kunta ran to join his father at the fireside just in time to
hear the alimamo’s prayer. After it, no one said anything for
a few minutes. Crickets rasped loudly, and the smoky fires
cast dancing shadows upon the wide circle of faces.
Finally, the leathery old elder spoke: “Hundreds of rains
before even my earliest memories, talk reached across the
big waters of an African mountain of gold. This is what first
brought toubob to Africa!” There was no gold mountain, he
said, but gold beyond description had been found in
streams and mined from deep shafts first in northern
Guinea, then later in the forests of Ghana. “Toubob was
never told where gold came from,” said the old man, “for
what one toubob knows, soon they all know.”
Then Janneh spoke. Nearly as precious as gold in many
places, he said, was salt. He and Saloum had personally
seen salt and gold exchanged in equal weights. Salt was
found in thick slabs under certain distant sands, and certain
waters elsewhere would dry into a salty mush, which was
shaped into blocks after sitting in the sun.
“There was once a city of salt,” said the old man. “The
city of Taghaza, whose people built their houses and
mosques of blocks of salt.”
“Tell of the strange humpbacked animals you have
spoken of before now,” demanded an ancient-looking old
woman, daring to interrupt. She reminded Kunta of
Grandmother Nyo Boto.
A hyena howled somewhere in the night as people
leaned forward in the flickering light. It was Saloum’s turn to
speak. “Those animals that are called camels live in a

place of endless sand. They find their way across it from
the sun, the stars, and the wind. Janneh and I have ridden
these animals for as long as three moons with few stops for
water.”
“But many stops to fight off the bandits!” said Janneh.
“Once we were part of a caravan of twelve thousand
camels,” Saloum continued. “Actually, it was many smaller
caravans traveling together to protect ourselves against
bandits.”
Kunta saw that as Saloum spoke, Janneh was unrolling a
large piece of tanned hide. The elder made an impatient
gesture to two young men who sprang to throw onto the fire
some dry branches. In the flaring light, Kunta and the others
could follow Janneh’s finger as it moved across a strangelooking drawing. “This is Africa,” he said. The finger traced
what he told them was “the big water” to the west, and then
“the great sand desert,” a place larger by many times than
all of The Gambia—which he pointed out in the lower left of
the drawing.
“To the north coast of Africa, the toubob ships bring
porcelain, spices, cloth, horses, and countless things made
by men,” said Saloum. “Then, camels and donkeys bear
those goods inland to places like Sijilmasa, Ghadames,
and Marrakech.” The moving finger of Janneh showed
where those cities were. “And as we sit here tonight,” said
Saloum, “there are many men with heavy headloads
crossing deep forests taking our own African goods—ivory,
skins, olives, dates, kola nuts, cotton, copper, precious
stones—back to the toubob’s ships.”
Kunta’s mind reeled at what he heard, and he vowed
silently that someday he too would venture to such exciting
places.
“The marabout!” From far out on the trail, the lookout
drummer beat out the news. Quickly a formal greeting party
was lined up—Janneh and Saloum as the village’s
founders; then the Council of Elders, the alimamo, the
arafang; then the honored representatives of other villages,
including Omoro; and Kunta was placed with those of his
height among the village’s young ones. Musicians led them

all out toward the travelers’ tree, timing their approach to
meet the holy man as he arrived. Kunta stared hard at the
white-bearded, very black old man at the head of his long
and tired party. Men, women, and children were heavily
loaded with large head-bundles, except for a few men
herding cattle and, Kunta judged, more than a hundred
goats.
With quick gestures, the holy man blessed the welcoming
party and bade them rise from their knees. Then Janneh
and Saloum were specially blessed, and Omoro was
introduced by Janneh, and Saloum beckoned to Kunta, who
went dashing up alongside them. “This is my first son,” said
Omoro, “who bears his holy grandfather’s name.”
Kunta heard the marabout speak words in Arabic over
him—which he couldn’t understand, except for his
grandfather’s name—and he felt the holy man’s fingers
touching his head as lightly as a butterfly’s wing, and then
he went dashing back among those of his own age as the
marabout went to meet the others in the welcoming party,
conversing with them as if he were an ordinary man. The
young ones in Kunta’s group began to trail away and stare
at the long line of wives, children, students, and slaves who
brought up the rear of the procession.
The marabout’s wives and children quickly retired into
guest huts. The students, taking seats on the ground and
opening their headbundles, withdrew books and
manuscripts—the property of their teacher, the holy man—
and began reading aloud to those who gathered around
each of them to listen. The slaves, Kunta noticed, didn’t
enter the village with the others. Remaining outside the
fence, the slaves squatted down near where they had
tethered the cattle and penned the goats. They were the
first slaves Kunta had ever seen who kept away from other
people.
The holy man could scarcely move for all the people on
their knees around him. Villagers and distinguished visitors
alike pressed their foreheads to the dirt and wailed for him
to hear their plaints, some of the nearest presuming to
touch his garment. Some begged him to visit their villages

and conduct long-neglected religious services. Some
asked for legal decisions, since law and religion were
companions under Islam. Fathers asked to be given
meaningful names for new babies. People from villages
without an arafang asked if their children might be taught by
one of the holy man’s students.
These students were now busily selling small squares of
cured goathide, which many hands then thrust toward the
holy man for him to make his mark on. A holy-marked piece
of goatskin, sewn into a treasured saphie charm such as
Kunta wore around his upper arm, would insure the
wearer’s constant nearness to Allah. For the two cowrie
shells he had brought with him from Juffure, Kunta
purchased a square of goathide and joined the jostling
crowd that pressed in upon the marabout.
It ran through Kunta’s mind that his grandfather must have
been like this holy man, who had the power, through Allah,
to bring the rain to save a starving village, as Kairaba
Kunta Kinte had once saved Juffure. So his beloved
grandmas Yaisa and Nyo Boto had told him since he was
old enough to understand. But only now, for the first time,
did he truly understand the greatness of his grandfather—
and of Islam. Only one person, thought Kunta, was going to
be told why he had decided to spend his precious two
cowries and now stood holding his own small square of
cured goatskin waiting his turn for a holy mark. He was
going to take the blessed goatskin back home and turn it
over to Nyo Boto, and ask her to keep it for him until the
time came to sew it into a precious saphie chaim for the
arm of his own first son.

CHAPTER 21
Kunta’s kafo, galled with envy of his trip, and expecting that
he would return to Juffure all puffed up with himself, had
decided—without any of them actually saying so—to show
no interest whatever in him or his travels when he returned.
And so they did, thinking nothing of how heartsick it made
Kunta feel to arrive home and find his lifelong mates not
only acting as if he hadn’t been away, but actually ending
conversations if he came near, his dearest friend Sitafa
acting even colder than the others. Kunta was so upset that
he hardly even thought about his new infant brother,
Suwadu, who had been born while he was away with
Omoro.
One noon, as the goats grazed, Kunta finally decided to
overlook his mates’ unkindness and try to patch things up.
Walking over to the other boys, who were sitting apart from
him eating their lunches, he sat down among them and
simply began talking. “I wish you could have been with me,”
he said quietly, and without waiting for their reaction, began
to tell them about the trip.
He told how hard the days of walking had been, how his
muscles had ached, about his fright in passing the lions.
And he described the different villages he had passed
through and the people who lived there. While he spoke,
one of the boys jumped up to regroup his goats, and when
he returned—without seeming to notice—sat down closer
to Kunta. Soon Kunta’s words were being accompanied by
grunts and exclamations from the others, and before they
knew it, just at that point in his story when he reached his
uncles’ new village, the time had come to drive the goats
homeward.
The next morning in the schoolyard, all of the boys had to
strain not to let the arafang suspect their impatience to
leave. Finally out again with their goats, they huddled
around Kunta, and he began to tell them about the different
tribes and languages all intermingled in his uncles’ village.

He was in the middle of one of the tales of faraway places
that Janneh and Saloum had told around the campfire—the
boys hanging raptly on every word—when the stillness of
the fields was broken by the ferocious barking of a wuolo
dog and the shrill, terrified bleating of a goat.
Springing upright, they saw over the edge of the tall
grass a great, tawny panther dropping a goat from his jaws
and lunging at two of their wuolo dogs. The boys were still
standing there, too shocked and scared to move, when one
of the dogs was flung aside by the panther’s sweeping paw
—as the other dog leaped wildly back and forth, the panther
crouched to spring, their horrible snarlings drowning out the
frantic barking of the other dogs and the cries of the other
goats, which were bounding off in all directions.
Then the boys fanned out, shouting and running, most
trying to head off the goats. But Kunta bolted blindly toward
his father’s fallen goat. “Stop, Kunta! No!” screamed Sitafa
as he tried to stop him from running between the dogs and
the panther. He couldn’t catch him, but when the panther
saw the two yelling boys rushing at him, he backed off a few
feet, then turned and raced back toward the forest with the
enraged dogs at his heels.
The panther stink and the mangled nanny goat made
Kunta sick—blood was running darkly down her twisted
neck, her tongue lolled out; her eyes were rolled back up in
her head and— most horribly—her belly was ripped wide
open and Kunta could see her unborn kid inside, still slowly
pulsing. Nearby was the first wuolo dog, whining in pain
from its gashed side and trying to crawl toward Kunta.
Vomiting where he stood, Kunta turned, ashen, and looked
at Sitafa’s anguished face.
Dimly, through his tears, Kunta sensed some of the other
boys around him, staring at the hurt dog and the dead goat.
Then slowly they all drew back—all but Sitafa, who put his
arms around Kunta. None of them spoke, but the question
hung in the air: How is he going to tell his father? Somehow
Kunta found his voice. “Can you care for my goats?” he
asked Sitafa. “I must take this hide to my father.”
Sitafa went over and talked with the other boys, and two

of them quickly picked up and carried off the whimpering
dog. Kunta then motioned Sitafa to go away with the others.
Kneeling by the dead nanny goat with his knife, Kunta cut
and pulled, and cut again, as he had seen his father do it,
until finally he rose with the wet hide in his hands. Pulling
weeds, he covered over the nanny’s carcass and the
unborn kid, and started back toward the village. Once
before he had forgotten his goats while herding, and he had
vowed never to let it happen again. But it had happened
again, and this time a nanny goat had been killed.
Desperately, he hoped it was a nightmare and that he’d
awaken now, but the wet hide was in his hands. He wished
death upon himself, but he knew his disgrace would be
taken among the ancestors. Allah must be punishing him
for boasting, Kunta thought with shame. He stopped to
kneel toward the way the sun rose and prayed for
forgiveness.
Rising, he saw that his kafo had all the goats herded
back together and were getting ready to leave the grazing
area, lifting their headloads of firewood. One boy was
carrying the injured dog, and two of the other dogs were
limping badly. Sitafa, seeing Kunta looking toward them,
put his headload down and started toward Kunta, but
quickly Kunta waved him away again to go on with the rest.
Each footstep along the worn goat trail seemed to take
Kunta closer to the end—the end of everything. Guilt and
terror and numbness washed over him in waves. He would
be sent away. He would miss Binta, Lamin, and old Nyo
Boto. He would even miss the arafang’s class. He thought
of his late Grandma Yaisa, of his holy man grandfather
whose name he bore, now disgraced, of his famous
traveling uncles, who had built a village. He remembered
that he had no headload of firewood. He thought of the
nanny goat, whom he remembered well, always skittish and
given to trotting off from the rest. And he thought of the kid
not yet born. And while he thought of all these things, he
could think of nothing but what he most feared to think of:
his father.
His mind lurched, and he stopped, rooted, not breathing,

staring ahead of him down the path. It was Omoro, running
toward him. No boy would have dared tell him; how had he
known?
“Are you all right?” his father asked.
Kunta’s tongue seemed cleaved to the roof of his mouth.
“Yes, Fa,” he said finally. But by then Omoro’s hand was
exploring Kunta’s belly, discovering that the blood soaking
his dundiko wasn’t Kunta’s.
Straightening, Omoro took the hide and laid it on the
grass. “Sit down!” he ordered, and Kunta did, trembling as
Omoro sat across from him.
“There is something you need to know,” said Omoro. “All
men make mistakes. I lost a goat to a lion when I was of
your rains.”
Pulling at his tunic, Omoro bared his left hip. The pale,
deeply scarred place there shocked Kunta. “I learned, and
you must learn. Never run toward any dangerous animal.”
His eyes searched Kunta’s face. “Do you hear me?”
“Yes, Fa.”
Omoro got up, took the goat’s hide, and flung it far off
into the brush. “Then that is all that needs to be said.”
Kunta’s head reeled as he walked back to the village
behind Omoro. Greater even than his guilt, and his relief,
was the love he felt for his father at this moment.

CHAPTER 22
Kunta had reached his tenth rain, and the second-kafo
boys his age were about to complete the schooling they
had received twice daily since they were five rains old.
When the day of graduation came, the parents of Kunta and
his mates seated themselves in the arafang’s schoolyard
beaming with pride in the very front rows, even ahead of the
village elders. While Kunta and the others squatted before
the arafang, the village alimamo prayed. Then the arafang
stood and began looking around at his pupils as they
waved their hands to be asked a question. Kunta was the
first boy he chose.
“What was the profession of your forefathers, Kunta
Kinte?” he asked.
“Hundreds of rains ago in the land of Mali,” Kunta
confidently replied, “the Kinte men were blacksmiths, and
their women were makers of pots and weavers of cloth.”
With each pupil’s correct answer, all those assembled
made loud sounds of pleasure.
Then the arafang asked a mathematical question: “If a
baboon has seven wives, each wife has seven children,
and each child eats seven groundnuts for seven days, how
many nuts did the baboon steal from some man’s farm?”
After much frantic figuring with grass-quill pens on their
cottonwood slates, the first to yelp out the right answer was
Sitafa Silla, and the crowd’s shouting of praise drowned out
the groans of the other boys.
Next the boys wrote their names in Arabic, as they had
been taught. And one by one, the arafang held up the slates
for all the parents and other spectators to see for
themselves what education had achieved. Like the other
boys, Kunta had found the marks that talk even harder to
read than they were to write. Many mornings and evenings,
with the arafang rapping their knuckles, they had all wished
that writing was as easy to understand as the talking drum,
which even those of Lamin’s age could read as if someone

standing beyond sight were calling out the words.
One by one now, the arafang asked each graduate to
stand. Finally came Kunta’s turn. “Kunta Kinte!” With all
eyes upon him, Kunta felt the great pride of his family in the
front row, even of his ancestors in the burying ground
beyond the village—most especially of his beloved
Grandma Yaisa. Standing up, he read aloud a verse from
the Koran’s last page; finishing, he pressed it to his
forehead and said, “Amen!” When the readings were done,
the teacher shook each boy’s hand and announced loudly
that as their education was complete, these boys were now
of the third kafo, and everyone broke out into a loud
cheering. Binta and the other mothers quickly removed the
covers from the bowls and calabashes they had brought,
heaped with delicious foods, and the graduation ceremony
ended in a feast that soon emptied both.
Omoro was waiting the next morning when Kunta came
to take the family’s goats out for the day’s grazing. Pointing
to a fine young male and female, Omoro said, “These two
are your school-finishing present.” Almost before Kunta
could stammer out his thanks, Omoro walked away without
another word—as if he gave away a pair of goats every day
—and Kunta tried very hard not to seem excited. But the
moment his father was out of sight, Kunta whooped so loud
that his new charges jumped and started running—with all
the others in hot pursuit. By the time he caught up with them
and herded them out to the fields, the rest of his mates
were already there—showing off their own new goats.
Treating them like sacred animals, the boys steered their
charges to only the most tender grasses, already picturing
the strong young kids they would soon produce, and the
kids would have soon after, until each boy had a herd as
large and valuable as his father’s.
Before the next new moon appeared, Omoro and Binta
were among the parents who gave away a third goat—this
one to the arafang as an expression of gratitude for their
son’s education. If they had been more prosperous, they
would have been glad to give even a cow, but they knew he
understood that this was beyond their means, as it was

beyond the means of everyone in Juffure, which was a
humble village. Indeed, some parents—new slaves with
nothing saved—had little to offer but their own backs, and
their grateful gift of a moon’s farm work for the arafang was
graciously accepted.
The passing moons soon flowed into seasons until yet
another rain had passed and Kunta’s kafo had taught
Lamin’s kafo how to be goatherds. A time long awaited
now drew steadily nearer. Not a day passed that Kunta and
his mates didn’t feel both anxiety and joy at the approach of
the next harvest festival, which would end with the taking
away of the third kafo—those boys between ten and fifteen
rains in age—to a place far away from Juffure, to which they
would return, after four moons, as men.
Kunta and the others tried to act as if none of them were
really giving the matter any particular thought or concern.
But they thought of little else, and they watched and listened
for the slightest sign or word from a grown-up that had
anything at all to do with manhood training. And early in the
dry season, after several of their fathers quietly left Juffure
for two or three days and just as quietly returned, the boys
whispered tensely among themselves, especially after
Kalilu Conteh overheard his uncle say that much-needed
repairs had been made on the jujuo, the manhood-training
village that had gone unused and exposed to weather and
animals for almost five rains since the last training had
been completed there. Even more excited whispering
followed talk among their fathers about which elder might
be selected by the Council of Elders to be the kintango, the
man in charge of manhood training. Kunta and all of his
mates had many times heard their fathers, uncles, and
older brothers speaking reverently of the kintangos who
had supervised their own manhood training many rains
before.
It was just before the harvest season when all of the thirdkafo boys reported to one another in a fever of excitement
how their mothers had silently measured each of them with
a sewing tape around his head and down to his shoulders.
Kunta did his best to hide the vivid memory of that morning

five rains before when, as brand-new little goatherds, he
and his mates had been scared nearly out of their wits as
they watched screaming boys under white hoods being
kicked and jeered from the village by a band of terrifyingly
masked, shrieking, spear-carrying kankurang dancers.
The tobalo soon boomed out the beginning of the new
harvest, and Kunta joined the rest of the villagers in the
fields. He welcomed the long days of hard work, for they
kept him too busy and too tired to give much thought to
what lay ahead. But when the harvesting was done and the
festival began, he found himself unable to enjoy the music
and the dancing and the feasting as the others did—as he
himself had done for as long as he could remember. The
louder the merriment, in fact, the unhappier he became until
finally he spent most of the last two days of the festival
sitting by himself on the banks of the bolong skipping
stones across the water.
On the night before the last day of the festival, Kunta was
in Binta’s hut silently finishing his evening meal of groundnut
stew with rice when Omoro walked in behind him. From the
corner of his eye, Kunta glimpsed his father raising
something white, and before he had a chance to turn
around, Omoro had pulled a long hood down firmly over his
head. The terror that shot through Kunta all but numbed him.
He felt his father’s hand gripping his upper arm and urging
him to stand up, then to move backward until he was
pushed down onto a low stool. Kunta was grateful to sit, for
his legs felt like water and his head felt light. He listened to
himself breathing in short gasps, knowing that if he tried to
move, he would fall off the stool. So he sat very still, trying to
accustom himself to the darkness. Terrified as he was, it
seemed almost a double darkness. As his upper lip felt the
moist warmth of his breath inside the hood, it flashed
through Kunta’s mind that surely once such a hood had
been thrust in the same way over his father’s head. Could
Omoro have been so frightened? Kunta couldn’t even
imagine that, and he felt ashamed to be such a disgrace to
the Kinte clan.
It was very quiet in the hut. Wrestling the fear that knotted

the pit of his stomach, Kunta closed his eyes and focused
his very pores on trying to hear something, anything at all.
He thought he heard Binta moving about, but he couldn’t be
sure. He wondered where Lamin was, and Suwadu, who
surely would be making noise. He knew only one thing for
sure: Neither Binta nor anyone else was going to speak to
him, let alone lift that hood off his head. And then Kunta
thought how awful it would be if his hood did get lifted, for
everyone would see how scared he really was, and
perhaps therefore a boy unworthy of joining his kafo mates
in manhood training.
Even boys the size of Lamin knew—since Kunta had told
him—what would happen to anyone who showed himself
too weak or cowardly to endure the training that turned boys
into hunters, into warriors, into men—all within a period of
twelve moons. Suppose he should fail? He began gulping
down his fear, remembering how he had been told that any
boy who failed the manhood training would be treated as a
child for the rest of his life, even though he might look like a
grown man. He would be avoided, and his village would
never permit him to marry, lest he father others like himself.
These sad cases, Kunta had heard, usually slipped away
from their villages sooner or later, never to return, and even
their own fathers, mothers, brothers, and sisters would
never mention them again. Kunta saw himself slinking away
from Juffure like some mangy hyena, scorned by everyone;
it was too horrible to think of.
After a time, Kunta realized that he was faintly hearing
the drumbeats and the shouting of dancers in the distance.
More time passed. What hour was it, he wondered. He
guessed it must be near the sutoba hour, halfway between
dusk and dawn, but after a few moments he heard the
alimamo’s high-pitched wailing for the village’s safo prayer,
two hours before midnight. The music ceased and Kunta
knew that the villagers had stopped their celebrating and
the men were hastening to the mosque.
Kunta sat until he knew the prayers must have been over,
but the music didn’t resume. He listened hard, but could
hear only silence. Finally he nodded off, awakening with a

start only a few moments later. It was still quiet—and darker
under the hood than a moonless night. Finally, faintly, he
was certain that he could hear the early yippings of hyenas.
He knew that hyenas always yipped for a while before
settling down to steady howling, which they would continue
until early daybreak, sounding eerily far away.
During the harvest festival week, at the first streaks of
daybreak, Kunta knew the tobalo would boom. He sat
waiting for that to happen—for anything to happen. He felt
his anger building, expecting the tobalo to sound at any
moment—but nothing happened. He grated his teeth and
waited some more. And then, at last, after jerking awake a
few times, he dozed off into a fitful sleep. He all but leaped
from his skin when the tobalo finally did boom. Under the
hood, his cheeks were hot with embarrassment that he had
fallen asleep.
Having become accustomed to the hood’s darkness,
Kunta could all but see the morning’s activities from the
sounds his ears picked up—the crowing of the cocks, the
barking of the wuolo dogs, the wailing of the alimamo, the
bumping of the women’s pestles as they beat the breakfast
couscous. This morning’s prayer to Allah, he knew, would
be for the success of the manhood training that was about
to begin. He heard movement in the hut, and he sensed that
it was Binta. It was strange how he couldn’t see her, but he
knew it was his mother. Kunta wondered about Sitafa and
his other mates. It surprised him to realize that throughout
the night, he hadn’t once thought about them until now. He
told himself that they must surely have had as long a night
as he had.
When the music of koras and balafons began playing
outside the hut, Kunta heard the sound of people walking
and talking, louder and louder. Then drums joined the din,
their rhythm sharp and cutting. A moment later, his heart
seemed to stop as he sensed the sudden movement of
someone rushing into the hut. Before he could even brace
himself, his wrists were grabbed, and roughly he was
snatched up from the stool and jerked out through the hut
door into the all but deafening noise of staccato drums and

screeching people.
Hands knocked him and feet kicked him. Kunta thought
desperately of bolting away somehow, but just as he was
about to try, a firm yet gentle hand grasped one of his.
Breathing hoarsely under his hood, Kunta realized that he
was no longer being hit and kicked and that the screaming
of the crowd was suddenly no longer nearby. The people,
he guessed, had moved along to some other boy’s hut, and
the guiding hand that held his must belong to the slave
Omoro would have hired, as every father did, to lead his
hooded son to the jujuo.
The crowd’s shouting rose to a frenzied pitch every time
another boy was dragged from a hut, and Kunta was glad
he couldn’t see the kankurang dancers, who were making
bloodcurdling whoops as they sprang high into the air
brandishing their spears. Big drums and small drums—
every drum in the village, it seemed—were pounding as the
slave guided Kunta faster and faster between rows of
people shouting on either side of him, crying out things like
“Four moons!” and “They will become men!” Kunta wanted
to burst into tears. He wished wildly that he could reach out
and touch Omoro, Binta, Lamin—even the sniveling
Suwadu—for it felt too much to bear that four long moons
were going to pass before he would see again those he
loved even more than he had ever realized until now.
Kunta’s ears told him that he and his guide had joined a
moving line of marchers, all stepping to the swift rhythm of
the drums. As they passed through the village gates—he
could tell because the noise of the crowd began to fade—
he felt hot tears well up and run down his cheeks. He closed
his eyes tight, as if to hide the tears even from himself.
As he had felt Binta’s presence in the hut, now he felt,
almost as if it were a smell, the fear of his kafo mates
ahead and behind him in the line, and he knew that theirs
was as great as his. Somehow that made him feel less
ashamed. As he trudged on in the white blindness of his
hood, he knew that he was leaving behind more than his
father and his mother and his brothers and the village of his
birth, and this filled him with sadness as much as terror. But

he knew it must be done, as it had been done by his father
before him and would some day be done by his son. He
would return, but only as a man.

CHAPTER 23
They must be approaching—within a stone’s throw, Kunta
sensed—a recently cut bamboo grove. Through his hood,
he could smell the rich fragrance of bamboo freshly
chopped. They marched closer, the smell became stronger
and stronger; they were at the barrier, then through it, but
they were still outdoors. Of course—it was a bamboo
fence. Suddenly the drums stopped and the marchers
halted. For several minutes, Kunta and the others stood still
and silent. He listened for the slightest sound that might tell
him when they had stopped or where they were, but all he
could hear was the screeching of parrots and the scolding
of monkeys overhead
Then, suddenly, Kunta’s hood was lifted. He stood
blinking in the bright sun of midafternoon, trying to adjust his
eyes to the light. He was afraid even to turn his head
enough to see his kafo mates, for directly before them
stood stern, wrinkled senior elder Silla Ba Dibba. Like all
the other boys, Kunta knew him and his family well. But Silla
Ba Dibba acted as if he had never seen any of them before
—indeed, as if he would rather not see them now; his eyes
scanned their faces as he would have looked at crawling
maggots. Kunta knew that this surely was their kintango.
Standing on either side of him were two younger men, Ali
Sise and Soru Tura, whom Kunta also knew well; Soru was
a special friend of Omoro’s. Kunta was grateful that neither
of them was Omoro, to see his son so scared.
As they had been taught, the entire kafo—all twenty-three
boys—crossed their palms over their hearts and greeted
their elders in the traditional way: “Peace!” “Peace only!”
replied the old kintango and his assistants. Widening his
gaze for a moment—careful not to move his head—Kunta
saw that they stood in a compound dotted with several
small, mud-walled, thatch-roofed huts and surrounded by
the tall new bamboo fence. He could see where the huts
had been patched, undoubtedly by the fathers who had

disappeared from Juffure for a few days. All this he saw
without moving a muscle. But the next moment he nearly
jumped out of his skin.
“Children left Juffure village,” said the kintango suddenly
in a loud voice. “If men are to return, your fears must be
erased, for a fearful person is a weak person, and a weak
person is a danger to his family, to his village, and to his
tribe.” He glared at them as if he had never seen such a
sorry lot, and then turned away. As he did so, his two
assistants sprang forward and began to lay about among
the boys with limber sticks, pummeling their shoulders and
backsides smartly as they herded them like so many goats,
a few boys apiece, into the small mud huts.
Huddled in their bare hut, Kunta and his four mates were
too terrified to feel the lingering sting of the blows they had
received, and too ashamed to raise their heads even
enough to look at one another. After a few minutes, when it
seemed that they would be spared from further abuse for a
little while, Kunta began to sneak looks at his companions.
He wished that he and Sitafa were in the same hut. He
knew these others, of course, but none as well as his yayo
brother, and his heart sank. But perhaps that’s no accident,
he reasoned. They probably don’t want us to have even that
small comfort. Maybe they’re not even going to feed us, he
began to think, when his stomach started to growl with
hunger.
Just after sunset, the kintango’s assistants burst into the
hut. “Move!” A stick caught him sharply across the
shoulders, and the scrambling boys were hissed at as they
rushed outside into the dusk, bumping into boys from other
huts, and under the flying sticks were herded with gruff
orders into a ragged line, each boy grasping the hand of
the boy ahead. When they were all in place, the kintango
fixed them with a dark scowl and announced that they were
about to undertake a night journey deep into the
surrounding forest.
At the order to march, the long line of boys set out along
the path in clumsy disarray, and the sticks fell steadily
among them. “You walk like buffalo!” Kunta heard close to

his ear. A boy cried out as he was hit, and both assistants
shouted loudly in the darkness, “Who was that?,” and their
sticks rained down even harder. After that no boy uttered a
sound.
Kunta’s legs soon began to hurt—but not as soon or as
badly as they would have done if he hadn’t learned the
manner of loose striding taught him by his father on their
trip to the village of Janneh and Saloum. It pleased him to
think that the other boys’ legs were surely hurting worse
than his, for they wouldn’t yet know how to walk. But nothing
he had learned did anything to help Kunta’s hunger and
thirst. His stomach felt tied in knots, and he was starting to
feel light-headed when at last a stop was called near a
small stream. The reflection of the bright moon in its surface
was soon set to rippling as the boys fell to their knees and
began to scoop up and gulp down handfuls of water. A
moment later the kintango’s assistants commanded them
away from the stream with orders not to drink too much at
once, then opened their headpacks and passed out some
chunks of dried meat. The boys tore away at the morsels
like hyenas; Kunta chewed and swallowed so fast that he
barely tasted the four bites he managed to wrest away for
himself.
Every boy’s feet had big, raw blisters on them, Kunta’s
as bad as any of the rest; but it felt so good to have food
and water in his stomach that he hardly noticed. As they sat
by the stream, he and his kafo mates began to look around
in the moonlight at one another, this time too tired rather
than too afraid to speak. Kunta and Sitafa exchanged long
glances, but neither could tell in the dim light if his friend
looked as miserable as he felt himself.
Kunta hardly had a chance to cool his burning feet in the
stream before the kintango’s assistants ordered them back
into formation for the long walk back to the jujuo. His legs
and head were numb when they finally came within sight of
the bamboo gates shortly before dawn. Feeling ready to
die, he trudged to his hut, bumped into another boy already
inside, lost his footing, stumbled to the dirt floor—and fell
deep asleep right where he lay.

On every night for the next six nights came another
march, each one longer than the last. The pain of his
blistered feet was terrible, but Kunta found by the fourth
night that he somehow didn’t mind the pain as much, and
he began to feel a welcome new emotion: pride. By the
sixth march, he and the other boys discovered that though
the night was very dark, they no longer needed to hold the
next boy’s hand in order to maintain a straight marching
line.
On the seventh night came the kintango’s first personal
lesson for the boys: showing them how men deep in the
forest used the stars to guide them, so that they would
never be lost. Within the first half moon, every boy of the
kafo had learned how to lead the marching line by the stars,
back toward the jujuo. One night when Kunta was the
leader, he almost stepped on a bush rat before it noticed
him and scurried for cover. Kunta was almost as proud as
he was startled, for this meant that the marchers had been
walking too silently to be heard even by an animal.
But animals, the kintango told them, were the best
teachers of the art of hunting, which was one of the most
important things for any Mandinka to learn. When the
kintango was satisfied that they had mastered the
techniques of marching, he took the kafo, for the next half
moon, deep into the bush far from the jujuo, where they built
lean-to shelters to sleep in between countless lessons in
the secrets of becoming a simbon. Kunta’s eyes never
seemed to have been closed before one of the kintango’s
assistants was shouting them awake for some training
session.
The kintango’s assistants pointed out where lions had
recently crouched in wait, then sprung out to kill passing
antelope, then where the lions had gone after their meal
and laid down to sleep for the rest of the night. The tracks of
the antelope herd were followed backward until they almost
painted a picture for the boys of what those antelope had
done through the day before they met the lions. The kafo
inspected the wide cracks in rocks where wolves and
hyenas hid. And they began to learn many tricks of hunting

that they had never dreamed about. They had never
realized, for example, that the first secret of the master
simbon was never moving abruptly. The old kintango
himself told the boys a story about a foolish hunter who
finally starved to death in an area thick with game, because
he was so clumsy and made so much noise, darting here
and there, that all about him animals of every sort swiftly
and silently slipped away without his even realizing that any
had been near.
The boys felt like that clumsy hunter during their lessons
in imitating the sounds of animals and birds. The air was
rent with their grunts and whistles, yet no birds or animals
came near. Then they would be told to lie very quietly in
hiding places while the kintango and his assistants made
what seemed to them the same sounds, and soon animals
and birds would come into sight, cocking their heads and
looking for the others who had called to them.
When the boys were practicing bird calls one afternoon,
suddenly a large-bodied, heavy-beaked bird landed with a
great squawking in a nearby bush. “Look!” one boy shouted
with a loud laugh—and every other boy’s heart leaped into
his throat, knowing that once again that boy’s big mouth
was going to get them all punished together. No few times
before had he shown his habit of acting before thinking—
but now the kintango surprised them. He walked over to the
boy and said to him very sternly, “Bring that bird to me—
alive!” Kunta and his mates held their breaths as they
watched the boy hunch down and creep toward the bush
where the heavy bird sat stupidly, turning its head this way
and that. But when the boy sprang, the bird managed to
escape his clutching hands, frantically beating its stubby
wings just enough to raise its big body over the brushtops
—and the boy went leaping after it in hot pursuit, soon
disappearing from sight.
Kunta and the others were thunderstruck. There was
clearly no limit to what the kintango might order them to do.
For the next three days and two nights, as the boys went
about their training sessions, they cast long glances at
each other and then the nearby bush, all of them wondering

and worrying about what had befallen their missing mate.
As much as he had annoyed them before by getting them
all beaten for things he’d done, he seemed never more one
of them now that he was gone.
The boys were just getting up on the morning of the fourth
day when the jujuo lookout signaled that someone was
approaching the village. A moment later came the drum
message: It was he. They rushed out to meet him,
whooping as if their own brother had returned from a trek to
Marrakech. Thin and dirty and covered with cuts and
bruises, he swayed slightly as they ran up and slapped him
on the back. But he managed a weak smile—and well he
should: Under his arm, its wings and feet and beak bound
with a length of vine, he held the bird. It looked even worse
than he did, but it was still alive.
The kintango came out, and though speaking to that boy,
he made it clear that he was really speaking to them all:
“This taught you two important things—to do as you are
told, and to keep your mouth shut. These are among the
makings of men.” Then Kunta and his mates saw that boy
receive the first clearly approving look cast upon anyone by
the old kintango, who had known that the boy would sooner
or later be able to catch a bird so heavy that it could make
only short, low hops through the bush.
The big bird was quickly roasted and eaten with great
relish by everyone except his captor, who was so tired that
he couldn’t stay awake long enough for it to cook. He was
permitted to sleep through the day and also through the
night, which Kunta and the others had to spend out in the
bush on a hunting lesson. The next day, during the first rest
period, the boy told his hushed mates what a torturous
chase he had led, until finally, after two days and a night, he
had laid a trap that the bird walked into. After trussing it up
—including the snapping beak—he had somehow kept
himself awake for another day and night, and by following
the stars as they had been taught, had found his way back
to the jujuo. For a while after that, the other boys had very
little to say to him. Kunta told himself that he wasn’t really
jealous, it was just that the boy seemed to think that his

exploit—and the kintango’s approval of it—had made him
more important than his kafo mates. And the very next time
the kintango’s assistants ordered an afternoon of wrestling
practice, Kunta seized the chance to grab that boy and
throw him roughly to the ground.
By the second moon of manhood training, Kunta’s kafo
had become almost as skilled at survival in the forest as
they would have been in their own village. They could now
both detect and follow the all but invisible signs of animals,
and now they were learning the secret rituals and prayers of
the forefathers that could make a very great simbon himself
invisible to animals. Every bite of meat they ate now was
either trapped by the boys or shot by their slings and
arrows. They could skin an animal twice as fast as they
could before, and cook the meat over the nearly smokeless
fires they had learned to build by striking flint close to dry
moss under light, dry sticks. Their meals of roasted game
—sometimes small bush rats—were usually topped off with
insects toasted crispy in the coals.
Some of the most valuable lessons they learned weren’t
even planned. One day, during a rest period, when a boy
was testing his bow and one careless arrow happened to
strike a nest of kurburungo bees high in a tree, a cloud of
angry bees swarmed down—and once again all the boys
suffered for the mistake of one. Not even the fastest runner
among them escaped the painful stings.
“The simbon never shoots an arrow without knowing what
it will hit,” the kintango told them later. Ordering the boys to
rub one another’s puffed and hurting places with shea tree
butter, he said, “Tonight, you will deal with those bees in the
proper manner.” By nightfall, the boys had piled dry moss
beneath the tree that held the nest. After one of the
kintango’s assistants set it afire, the other one threw into
the flames a quantity of leaves from a certain bush. Thick,
choking smoke rose into the tree’s upper limbs, and soon
dead bees were dropping around the boys by the
thousands, as harmlessly as rain. In the morning, Kunta and
his kafo were shown how to melt down the honeycombs—
skimming off the rest of the dead bees—so that they could

eat their fill of honey. Kunta could almost feel himself tingle
with that extra strength it was said honey would give to
great hunters when they were in need of quick nourishment
deep in the forest.
But no matter what they went through, no matter how
much they added to their knowledge and abilities, the old
kintango was never satisfied. His demands and his
discipline remained so strict that the boys were torn
between fear and anger most of the time—when they
weren’t too weary to feel either. Any command to one boy
that wasn’t instantly and perfectly performed still brought a
beating to the entire kafo. And when they weren’t being
beaten, it seemed to Kunta, they were being wakened
roughly in the middle of the night for a long march—always
as a punishment for some boy’s wrongdoing. The only thing
that kept Kunta and the others from giving that boy a
beating of their own was the certain knowledge that they
would be beaten for fighting, among the first lessons they
had learned in life—long before coming to the jujuo—
having been that Mandinkas must never fight among
themselves. Finally the boys began to understand that the
welfare of the group depended on each of them—just as
the welfare of their tribe would depend on each of them one
day. Violations of the rule’s slowly dwindled to an
occasional lapse, and with the decline in beatings, the fear
they felt for the kintango was slowly replaced by a respect
they had felt before only for their fathers.
But still hardly a day would pass without something new
to make Kunta and his mates feel awkward and ignorant all
over again. It amazed them to learn, for example, that a rag
folded and hung in certain ways near a man’s hut would
inform other Mandinka men when he planned to return, or
that sandals crossed in certain ways outside a hut told
many things that only other men would understand. But the
secret Kunta found the most remarkable of all was sira
kango, a kind of men’s talk in which sounds of Mandinka
words were changed in such a way that no women or
children or non-Mandinkas were permitted to learn. Kunta
remembered times when he had heard his father say

something very rapidly to another man that Kunta had not
understood nor dared to ask explained. Now that he had
learned it himself, he and his mates soon spoke nearly
everything they said in the secret talk of men.
In every hut as each moon went by, the boys added a
new rock to a bowl to mark how long they had been gone
from Juffure. Within days after the third rock was dropped in
the bowl, the boys were wrestling in the compound one
afternoon when suddenly they looked toward the gate of the
jujuo, and there stood a group of twenty-five or thirty men. A
loud gasp rose from the boys as they recognized their
fathers, uncles, and older brothers. Kunta sprang up, unable
to believe his eyes, as a bolt of joy shot through him at the
first sight of Omoro for three moons. But it was as if some
unseen hand held him back and stifled a cry of gladness—
even before he saw in his father’s face no sign that he
recognized his son.
Only one boy rushed forward, calling out his father’s
name, and without a word that father reached for the stick
of the nearest kintango’s assistant and beat his son with it,
shouting at him harshly for betraying his emotions, for
showing that he was still a boy. He added, unnecessarily,
as he gave him the last licks, that his son should expect no
favors from his father. Then the kintango himself barked a
command for the entire kafo to lie on their bellies in a row,
and all of the visiting men walked along the row and flailed
the upturned backsides with their walking sticks. Kunta’s
emotions were in a turmoil; the blows he didn’t mind at all,
knowing them to be merely another of the rigors of
manhood training, but it pained him not to be able to hug
his father or even hear his voice, and it shamed him to
know that it wasn’t manly even to wish for such indulgences.
The beating over, the kintango ordered the boys to race,
to jump, to dance, to wrestle, to pray as they had been
taught, and the fathers, uncles, and older brothers watched
it all silently, and then departed with warm compliments to
the kintango and his assistants, but not so much as a
backward look at the boys, who stood with downcast faces.
Within the hour, they got another beating for sulking about

the preparation of their evening meal. It hurt all the more
because the kintango and his assistants acted as if the
visitors had never even been there. But early that night,
while the boys were wrestling before bedtime—only
halfheartedly now—one of the kintango’s assistants passed
by Kunta and said brusquely to him, under his breath, “You
have a new brother, and he is named Madi.”
Four of us now, thought Kunta, lying awake later that
night. Four brothers—four sons for his mother and father.
He thought how that would sound in the Kinte family history
when it was told by griots for hundreds of rains in the future.
After Omoro, thought Kunta, he would be the first man of the
family when he returned to Juffure. Not only was he learning
to be a man, but he was also learning many, many things he
would be able to teach Lamin, as already he had taught him
so many of the things of boyhood. At least he would teach
him that which was permissible for boys to know, and then
Lamin would teach Suwadu, and Suwadu would teach this
new one whom Kunta had not even seen, whose name was
Madi. And some day, Kunta thought as he drifted off to
sleep, when he was as old as Omoro, he would have sons
of his own, and it would all begin again.

CHAPTER 24
“You are ceasing to be children.You are experiencing
rebirth as men,” the kintango said one morning to the
assembled kafo. This was the first time the kintango had
used the word “men” except to tell them what they weren’t.
After moons of learning together, working together, being
beaten together, he told them, each of them was finally
beginning to discover that he had two selves—one within
him, and the other, larger self in all those whose blood and
lives he shared. Not until they learned that lesson could they
undertake the next phase of manhood training: how to be
warriors. “You know already that Mandinkas fight only if
others are warlike,” said the kintango. “But we are the finest
warriors if driven to fight.”
For the next half moon, Kunta and his mates learned how
to make war. Famous Mandinka battle strategies were
drawn in the dust by the kintango or his assistants, and then
the boys were told to re-enact the strategies in mock
battles. “Never completely encircle your enemy,” counseled
the kintango. “Leave him some escape, for he will fight
even more desperately if trapped.” The boys learned also
that battles should start in late afternoon, so that any enemy,
seeing defeat, could save face by retreating in the
darkness. And they were taught that during any wars,
neither enemy should ever do harm to any traveling
marabouts, griots, or blacksmiths, for an angered marabout
could bring down the displeasure of Allah; an angered griot
could use his eloquent tongue to stir the enemy army to
greater savagery; and an angered blacksmith could make
or repair weapons for the enemy.
Under the direction of the kintango’s assistants, Kunta
and the others carved out barbed spears and made barbed
arrows of the kind used only in battle, and practiced with
them on smaller and smaller targets. When a boy could hit
a bamboo cane twenty-five steps away, he was cheered
and praised. Tramping into the woods, the boys found

some koona shrub, whose leaves they picked to be boiled
back at the jujuo. Into the resulting thick, black juice they
would dip a cotton thread, and they were shown how that
thread, wound around an arrow’s barbs, would seep a
deadly poison into whatever wound the arrow made.
At the end of the war-training period, the kintango told
them more than they had ever known before—and told
them more excitingly than they had ever heard it—about
that greatest of all Mandinka wars and warriors—the time
when the army of the fabled ex-slave general Sundiata, son
of Sogolon, the Buffalo Woman, conquered the forces of
the Boure country’s King Soumaoro, a king so cruel that he
wore human-skin robes and adorned his palace walls with
enemy’s bleached skulls.
Kunta and his mates held their breaths, hearing how both
armies suffered thousands of wounded or dead. But the
archers of the Mandinkas closed in on Soumaoro’s forces
like a giant trap, raining down arrows from both sides and
moving in steadily until Soumaoro’s terrified army finally
fled in rout. For days and nights, said the kintango—and it
was the first time the boys ever had seen him smile—the
talking drums of every village followed the marching
progress of the victorious Mandinka forces, laden with
enemy booty and driving thousands of captives before
them. In every village, happy crowds jeered and kicked the
prisoners, whose shaved heads were bowed and whose
hands were tied behind their backs. Finally General
Sundiata called a huge meeting of the people, and he
brought before them the chiefs of all the villages he had
defeated and gave them back their spears of chiefhood’s
rank, and then he established among those chiefs the
bonds of peace, which would last among them for the next
one hundred rains. Kunta and his mates went dreamily to
their beds, never prouder to be Mandinkas.
As the next moon of training began, drumtalk reached the
jujuo telling of new visitors to be expected within the next
two days. The excitement with which the news of any
visitors would have been received, after so long since the
fathers and brothers had come to see them, was doubled

when the boys learned that the sender of the message was
the drummer of Juffure’s champion wrestling team, which
was coming to conduct special lessons for the trainees.
Late in the afternoon of the next day, the drums
announced their arrival even earlier than expected. But the
boys’ pleasure at seeing all the familiar faces again was
forgotten when, without a word, the wrestlers grabbed them
and began to flip them onto the ground harder than they had
ever been thrown in their lives. And every boy was bruised
and hurting when the wrestlers divided them into smaller
groups to grapple one another, as the champions
supervised. Kunta had never imagined there were so many
wrestling holds, nor how effectively they could work, if used
correctly. And the champions kept drumming into the boys’
ears that it was knowledge and expertness and not strength
that made the difference between being an ordinary
wrestler and a champion. Still, as they demonstrated the
holds for their pupils, the boys couldn’t help admiring their
bulging muscles as much as their skill in using them.
Around the fire that night, the drummer from Juffure chanted
the names and the feats of great Mandinka wrestling
champions of even a hundred rains in the past, and when it
was the boys’ time for bed, the wrestlers left the jujuo to
return to Juffure.
Two days later came news of another visitor. This time
the message was brought by a runner from Juffure—a
young man of the fourth kafo whom Kunta and his mates
knew well, though in his own new manhood, he acted as if
he never had seen these third-kafo children. Without so
much as a glance at them, he ran up to the kintango and
announced, between deep breaths, that Kujali N’jai, a griot
well known throughout The Gambia, would soon spend one
full day at the jujuo.
In three days he arrived, accompanied by several young
men of his family. He was much older than any of the griots
Kunta had seen before—so old, in fact, that he made the
kintango seem young. After gesturing for the boys to squat
in a semicircle about him, the old man began to talk of how
he became what he was. He told them how, over years of

study from young manhood, every griot had buried deep in
his mind the records of the ancestors. “How else could you
know of the great deeds of the ancient kings, holy men,
hunters, and warriors who came hundreds of rains before
us? Have you met them?” asked the old man. “No! The
history of our people is carried to the future in here.” And he
tapped his gray head.
The question in the mind of every boy was answered by
the old griot: Only the sons of griots could become griots.
Indeed, it was their solemn duty to become griots. Upon
finishing their manhood training, these boys—like those
grandsons of his own who sat beside him here today—
would begin studying and traveling with selected elders,
hearing over and again the historical names and stories as
they had been passed down. And in due time, each young
man would know that special part of the forefathers’ history
in the finest and fullest detail, just as it had been told to his
father and his father’s father. And the day would come when
that boy would become a man and have sons to whom he
would tell those stories, so that the events of the distant
past would forever live.
When the awed boys had wolfed down their evening
meal and rushed back to gather again around the old griot,
he thrilled them until late into the night with stories his own
father had passed down to him—about the great black
empires that had ruled Africa hundreds of rains before.
“Long before toubob ever put his foot in Africa,” the old
griot said, there was the Empire of Benin, ruled by an allpowerful king called the Oba, whose every wish was
obeyed instantly. But the actual governing of Benin was
done by trusted counselors of the Oba, whose full time was
needed just for making the necessary sacrifices to
appease the forces of evil and for his proper attentions to a
harem of more than a hundred wives. But even before
Benin was a yet richer kingdom called Songhai, said the
griot. Songhai’s capital city was Gao, filled with fine houses
for black princes and rich merchants who lavishly
entertained traveling tradesmen who brought much gold to
buy goods.

“Nor was that the richest kingdom,” said the old man.
And he told the boys of ancestral Ghana, in which an entire
town was populated with only the king’s court. And King
Kanissaai had a thousand horses, each of which had three
servants and its own urinal made of copper. Kunta could
hardly believe his ears. “And each evening,” said the griot,
“when King Kanissaai would emerge from his palace, a
thousand fires would be lit, lighting up all between the
heavens and the earth. And the servants of the great King
would bring forth food enough to serve the ten thousand
people who gathered there each evening.”
Here he paused, and exclamations of wonder could not
be restrained by the boys, who knew well that no sound
should be made as a griot talked, but neither he nor even
the kintango himself seemed to notice their rudeness.
Putting into his mouth half of a kola nut and offering the
other half to the kintango, who accepted it with pleasure,
the griot drew the skirt of his robe closer about his legs
against the chill of the early night and resumed his stories.
“But even Ghana was not the richest black kingdom!” he
exclaimed. “The very richest, the very oldest of them all was
the kingdom of ancient Mali!” Like the other empires, Mali
had its cities, its farmers, its artisans, its blacksmiths,
tanners, dyers, and weavers, said the old griot. But Mali’s
enormous wealth came from its far-flung trade routes in salt
and gold and copper. “Altogether Mali was four months of
travel long and four months of travel wide,” said the griot,
“and the greatest of all its cities was the fabled Timbuktu!”
The major center of learning in all Africa, it was populated
by thousands of scholars, made even more numerous by a
steady parade of visiting wise men seeking to increase
their knowledge—so many that some of the biggest
merchants sold nothing but parchments and books. “There
is not a marabout, not a teacher in the smallest village,
whose knowledge has not come at least in part from
Timbuktu,” said the griot.
When finally the kintango stood up and thanked the griot
for the generosity with which he had shared with them the
treasures of his mind, Kunta and the others—for the first

time since they came to the jujuo—actually dared to voice
their displeasure, for the time had come for them to go to
bed. The kintango chose to ignore this impertinence, at
least for the time being, and sternly commanded them to
their huts—but not before they had a chance to beg him to
urge the griot to come back and visit them again.
They were still thinking and talking of the wondrous tales
the griot had told them when—six days later—word came
that a famous moro would soon be visiting the camp. The
moro was the highest grade of teacher in The Gambia;
indeed, there were only a few of them, and so wise were
they—after many rains of study—that their job was to teach
not schoolboys but other teachers, such as the arafang of
Juffure.
Even the kintango showed unusual concern about this
visitor, ordering the entire jujuo to be thoroughly cleaned,
with the dirt raked and then brushed with leafy branches to
a smoothness that would capture the honor of the fresh
footprints of the moro when he arrived. Then the kintango
assembled the boys in the compound and told them, “The
advice and the blessings of this man who will be with us is
sought not only by ordinary people but also by village chiefs
and even by kings.”
When the moro arrived the next morning, five of his
students were with him, each carrying headbundles that
Kunta knew would contain treasured Arabic books and
parchment manuscripts such as those from ancient
Timbuktu. As the old man passed through the gate, Kunta
and his mates joined the kintango and his assistants on
their knees, with their foreheads touching the ground. When
the moro had blessed them and their jujuo, they rose and
seated themselves respectfully around him as he opened
his books and began to read—first from the Koran, then
from such unheard-of books as the Taureta La Musa, the
Zabora Dawidi and the Lingeeh la Isa, which he said were
known to “Christians” as The Pentateuch of Moses, The
Psalms of David and The Book of Isaiah. Each time the
moro would open or close a book, roll or unroll a
manuscript, he would press it to his forehead and mutter

“Amen!”
When he had finished reading, the old man put his books
aside and spoke to them of great events and people from
the Christian Koran, which was known as the Holy Bible. He
spoke of Adam and Eve, of Joseph and his brethren; of
Moses, David, and Solomon; of the death of Abel. And he
spoke to them of great men of more recent history, such as
Djoulou Kara Naini, known to the toubob as Alexander the
Great, a mighty king of gold and silver whose sun had
shown over half of the world.
Before the moro finally rose to leave that night, he
reviewed what they already knew of the five daily prayers to
Allah, and he instructed them thoroughly in how to conduct
themselves inside the sacred mosque of their village, which
they would enter for their first time when they returned home
as men. Then he and his students had to hurry in order to
reach the next place on his busy schedule, and the boys
honored him—as the kintango had instructed them—by
singing one of the men’s songs they had learned from the
jalli kea: “One generation passes on.... Another generation
comes and goes.... But Allah abides forever.”
In his hut after the moro had gone that night, Kunta lay
awake thinking how so many things—indeed, nearly
everything they had learned—all tied together. The past
seemed with the present, the present with the future, the
dead with the living and those yet to be born; he himself
with his family, his mates, his village, his tribe, his Africa;
the world of man with the world of animals and growing
things—they all lived with Allah. Kunta felt very small, yet
very large. Perhaps, he thought, this is what it means to
become a man.

CHAPTER 25
The time had come for that which made Kunta and every
other boy shudder to think of: the kasas boyo operation,
which would purify a boy and prepare him to become a
father of many sons. They knew it was coming, but when it
came it was without warning. One day as the sun reached
the noontime position, one of the kintango’s assistants
gave what seemed to be only a routine order for a kafo to
line up in the compound, which the boys did as quickly as
usual. But Kunta felt a twinge of fear when the kintango
himself came from his hut, as he rarely did at midday, and
walked before them
“Hold out your fotos,” he commanded. They hesitated, not
believing—or wanting to believe—what they had heard.
“Now!” he shouted. Slowly and shyly, they obeyed, each
keeping his eyes on the ground as he reached inside his
loincloth.
Working their way from either end of the line, the
kintango’s assistants wrapped around the head of each
boy’s foto a short length of cloth spread with a green paste
made of a pounded leaf. “Soon your fotos will have no
feeling,” the kintango said, ordering them back into their
huts.
Huddled inside, ashamed and afraid of what would
happen next, the boys waited in silence until about
midafternoon, when again they were ordered outside,
where they stood watching as a number of men from Juffure
—the fathers, brothers, and uncles who had come before,
and others—filed in through the gate. Omoro was among
them, but this time Kunta pretended that he didn’t see his
father. The men formed themselves into a line facing the
boys and chanted together: “This thing to be done ... also
has been done to us ... as to the forefathers before us ... so
that you also will become ... all of us men together.” Then
the kintango ordered the boys back into their huts once
again.

Night was falling when they heard many drums suddenly
begin to pound just outside the jujuo. Ordered out of their
huts, they saw bursting through the gate about a dozen
leaping, shouting kankurang dancers. In leafy branch
costumes and bark masks, they sprang about brandishing
their spears among the terrified boys, and then—just as
abruptly as they had appeared—were gone. Almost numb
with fear, the boys now heard and followed dumbly the
kintango’s order to seat themselves close together with
their backs against the jujuo’s bamboo fence.
The fathers, uncles, and older brothers stood nearby, this
time chanting, “You soon will return to home ... and to your
farms ... and in time you will marry ... and life everlasting will
spring from your loins.” One of the kintango’s assistants
called out one boy’s name. As he got up, the assistant
motioned him behind a long screen of woven bamboo.
Kunta couldn’t see or hear what happened after that, but a
few moments later, the boy reappeared—with a
bloodstained cloth between his legs. Staggering slightly, he
was half carried by the other assistant back to his place
along the bamboo fence. Another boy’s name was called,
then another, and another, and finally:
“Kunta Kinte!”
Kunta was petrified. But he made himself get up and
walk behind the screen. Inside were four men, one of whom
ordered him to lie down on his back. He did so, his shaking
legs wouldn’t have supported him any longer anyway. The
men then leaned down, grasped him firmly, and lifted his
thighs upward. Just before closing his eyes, Kunta saw the
kintango bending over him with something in his hands.
Then he felt the cutting pain. It was even worse than he
thought it would be, though not as bad as it would have
been without the numbing paste. In a moment he was
bandaged tightly, and an assistant helped him back
outside, where he sat, weak and dazed, alongside the
others who had already been behind the screen. They
didn’t dare to look at one another. But the thing they had
feared above all else had now been done.
As the fotos of the kafo began healing, a general air of

jubilation rose within the jujuo, for gone forever was the
indignity of being mere boys in body as well as in mind.
Now they were very nearly men—and they were boundless
in their gratitude and reverence for the kintango. And he, in
turn, began to see Kunta’s kafo with different eyes. The old,
wrinkled, gray-haired elder whom they had slowly come to
love was sometimes seen even to smile now. And very
casually, when talking to the kafo, he or his assistants
would say, “You men—” and to Kunta and his mates, it
seemed as unbelievable as it was beautiful to hear.
Soon afterward the fourth new moon arrived, and two or
three members of Kunta’s kafo, at the kintango’s personal
order, began to leave the jujuo each night and trot all the
way to the sleeping village of Juffure, where they would slip
like shadows into their own mothers’ storehouses, steal as
much couscous, dried meats, and millet as they could carry,
and then race back with it to the jujuo, where it was gleefully
cooked the next day—“to prove yourselves smarter than all
women, even your mother,” the kintango had told them. But
that next day, of course, those boys’ mothers would boast
to their friends how they had heard their sons prowling and
had lain awake listening with pride.
There was a new feeling now in the evenings at the jujuo.
Nearly always, Kunta’s kafo would squat in a semicircle
around the kintango. Most of the time he remained as stern
in manner as before, but now he talked to them not as
bumbling little boys but as young men of his own village.
Sometimes he spoke to them about the qualities of
manhood—chief among which, after fearlessness, was
total honesty in all things. And sometimes he spoke to them
about the forefathers. Worshipful regard was a duty owed
by the living to those who dwelled with Allah, he told them.
He asked each boy to name the ancestor he remembered
best; Kunta named his Grandma Yaisa, and the kintango
said that each of the ancestors the boys had named—as
was the way of ancestors—was petitioning Allah in the best
interests of the living.
Another evening, the kintango told them how in one’s
village, every person who lived there was equally important

to that village; from the newest baby to the oldest elder. As
new men, they must therefore learn to treat everyone with
the same respect, and—as the foremost of their manhood
duties—to protect the welfare of every man, woman, and
child in Juffure as they would their own.
“When you return home,” said the kintango, “you will
begin to serve Juffure as its eyes and ears. You will be
expected to stand guard over the village—beyond the
gates as lookouts for toubob and other savages, and in the
fields as sentries to keep the crops safe from scavengers.
You will also be charged with the responsibility of
inspecting the women’s cooking pots—including those of
your own mothers—to make sure they are kept clean, and
you will be expected to reprimand them most severely if any
dirt or insects are found inside.” The boys could hardly wait
to begin their duties.
Though all but the oldest of them were still too young to
dream of the responsibilities they would assume when they
reached the fourth kafo, they knew that some day, as men
of fifteen to nineteen rains, they would be appointed to the
important job of carrying messages—like the young man
who had brought them word of the moro’s visit—between
Juffure and other villages. It would have been hard for
Kunta’s kafo to imagine such a thing, but those old enough
to be messengers longed for nothing more than to stop
being messengers, when they reached the fifth kafo at
twenty rains, they would graduate to really important work
—assisting the village elders as emissaries and
negotiators in all dealings with other villages. Men of
Omoro’s age—over thirty—rose gradually in rank and
responsibility with each passing rain until they themselves
acquired the honored status of elders. Kunta had often
proudly watched Omoro sitting on the edges of the Council
of Elders, and looked forward to the day when his father
would enter the inner circle of those who would inherit the
mantle of office from such revered leaders as the kintango
when they were called to Allah.
It was no longer easy for Kunta and the others to pay
attention as they should to everything the kintango said. It

seemed impossible to them that so much could have
happened in the past four moons and that they were really
about to become men. The past few days seemed to last
longer than the moons that preceded them, but finally—with
the fourth moon high and full in the heavens—the kintango’s
assistants ordered the kafo to line up shortly after the
evening meal.
Was this the moment for which they had waited? Kunta
looked around for their fathers and brothers, who would
surely be there for the ceremony. They were nowhere to be
seen. And where was the kintango? His eyes searched the
compound and found him—standing at the gate of the jujuo
—just as he swung it open wide, turned to them, and called
out: “Men of Juffure, return to your village!”
For a moment they stood rooted, then they rushed up
whooping and grabbed and hugged their kintango and his
assistants, who pretended to be offended by such
impertinence. Four moons before, as the hood was being
lifted from his head in this very compound, Kunta would
have found it difficult to believe that he would be sorry to
leave this place, or that he would come to love the stern old
man who stood before them on that day, but he felt both
emotions now. Then his thoughts turned homeward and he
was racing and shouting with the others out the gate and
down the path to Juffure. They hadn’t gone very far before,
as if upon some unspoken signal, their voices were stilled
and their pace slowed by the thoughts they all shared, each
in his own way—of what they were leaving behind, and of
what lay ahead of them. This time they didn’t need the stars
to find their way.

CHAPTER 26
“Aiee! Aiee!” The women’s happy shrieks rang out, and the
people were rushing from their huts, laughing, dancing, and
clapping their hands as Kunta’s kafo—and those who had
turned fifteen and become fourth kafo while they were away
at the jujuo—strode in through the village gate at the break
of dawn. The new men walked slowly, with what they hoped
was dignity, and they didn’t speak or smile—at first. When
he saw his mother running toward him, Kunta felt like
dashing to meet her, and he couldn’t stop his face from
lighting up, but he made himself continue walking at the
same measured pace. Then Binta was upon him—arms
around his neck, hands carressing his cheeks, tears welling
in her eyes, murmuring his name. Kunta permitted this only
briefly before he drew away, being now a man; but he
made it seem as if he did so only to get a better look at the
yowling bundle cradled snugly in the sling across her back.
Reaching inside, he lifted the baby out with both hands.
“So this is my brother Madi!” he shouted happily, holding
him high in the air.
Binta beamed at his side as he walked toward her hut
with the baby in his arms—making faces and cooing and
squeezing the plump little cheeks. But Kunta wasn’t so
taken with his little brother that he failed to notice the herd
of naked children that followed close behind them with eyes
as wide as their mouths. Two or three were at his knees,
and others darted in and out among Binta and the other
women, who were all exclaiming over how strong and
healthy Kunta looked, how manly he’d become. He
pretended not to hear, but it was music to his ears.
Kunta wondered where Omoro was, and where Lamin
was—remembering abruptly that his little brother would be
away grazing the goats. He had sat down inside Binta’s hut
before he noticed that one of the bigger first-kafo children
had followed them inside and now stood staring at him and
clinging to Binta’s skirt. “Hello, Kunta,” said the little boy. It

was Suwadu! Kunta couldn’t believe it. When he had left for
manhood training, Suwadu was just something underfoot,
too small to take notice of except when he was annoying
Kunta with his eternal whining. Now, within the space of four
moons, he seemed to have grown taller, and he was
beginning to talk; he had become a person. Giving the
baby back to Binta, he picked up Suwadu and swung him
high up to the roof of Binta’s hut, until his little brother
yelped with delight.
When he finished visiting with Suwadu, who ran outside
to see some of the other new men, the hut fell silent.
Brimming over with joy and pride, Binta felt no need to
speak. Kunta did. He wanted to tell her how much he had
missed her and how it gladdened him to be home. But he
couldn’t find the words. And he knew it wasn’t the sort of
thing a man should say to a woman—even to his mother.
“Where is my father?” he asked finally.
“He’s cutting thatch grass for your hut,” said Binta. In his
excitement, Kunta had nearly forgotten that, as a man, he
would now have his own private hut. He walked outside and
hurried to the place where his father had always told him
one could cut the best quality of roofing thatch.
Omoro saw him coming, and Kunta’s heart raced as he
saw his father begin walking to meet him. They shook
hands in the manner of men, each looking deeply into the
other’s eyes, seeing the other for the first time as man to
man. Kunta felt almost weak with emotion, and they were
silent for a moment. Then Omoro said, as if he were
commenting on the weather, that he had acquired for Kunta
a hut whose previous owner had married and built a new
house. Would he like to inspect the hut now? Kunta said
softly that he would, and they walked along together, with
Omoro doing most of the talking, since Kunta was still
having trouble finding words.
The hut’s mud walls needed as many repairs as the
thatching. But Kunta hardly noticed or cared, for this was
his own private hut, and it was all the way across the village
from his mother’s. He didn’t allow himself to show his
satisfaction, of course, let alone to speak of it. Instead, he

told Omoro only that he would make the repairs himself.
Kunta could fix the walls, said Omoro, but he would like to
finish the roof repairs he had already begun. Without
another word, he turned and headed back to the thatchgrass field—leaving Kunta standing there, grateful for the
everyday manner with which his father had begun their new
relationship as men.
Kunta spent most of the afternoon covering every corner
of Juffure, filling his eyes with the sight of all the dearly
remembered faces, familiar huts and haunts—the village
well, the schoolyard, the baobab and silk-cotton trees. He
hadn’t realized how homesick he had been until he began
to bask in the greetings of everyone he passed. He wished
it was time for Lamin to return with the goats, and found
himself missing one other very special person, even if she
was a woman. Finally—not caring whether it was
something a man should properly do—he headed for the
small, weathered hut of old Nyo Boto.
“Grandmother!” he called at the door.
“Who is it?” came the reply in a high, cracked, irritable
tone.
“Guess, Grandmother!” said Kunta, and he went inside
the hut.
It took his eyes a few moments to see her better in the
dim light. Squatting beside a bucket and plucking long
fibers from a slab of baobab bark that she had been
soaking with water from the bucket, she peered sharply at
him for a while before speaking. “Kunta!”
“It’s so good to see you, Grandmother!” he exclaimed.
Nyo Boto returned to her plucking of the fibers. “Is your
mother well?” she asked, and Kunta assured her that Binta
was.
He was a little taken aback, for her manner was almost
as if he hadn’t even been away anywhere, as if she hadn’t
noticed that he had become a man.
“I thought of you often while I was away—each time I
touched the saphie charm you put on my arm.”
She only grunted, not even looking up from her work.
He apologized for interrupting her and quickly left, deeply

hurt and terribly confused. He wouldn’t understand until
much later that her rebuff had hurt Nyo Boto even more than
it did him; she had acted as she knew a woman must
toward one who could no longer seek comfort at her skirts.
Still troubled, Kunta was walking slowly back toward his
new hut when he heard a familiar commotion: bleating
goats, barking dogs, and shouting boys. It was the second
kafo returning from their afternoon’s work in the bush.
Lamin would be among them. Kunta began to search their
faces anxiously as the boys approached. Then Lamin saw
him, shouted his name, and came dashing, wreathed in
smiles. But he stopped short a few feet away when he saw
his brother’s cool expression, and they stood looking at
each other. It was finally Kunta who spoke.
“Hello.”
“Hello, Kunta.”
Then they looked at each other some more. Pride shone
in Lamin’s eyes, but Kunta saw also the same hurt he had
just felt in the hut of Nyo Boto, and uncertainty about just
what to make of his new big brother. Kunta was thinking
that the way they were both acting wasn’t as he would have
had it be, but it was necessary that a man be regarded with
a certain amount of respect, even by his own brother.
Lamin was the first to speak again: “Your two goats are
both big with kids.” Kunta was delighted; that meant he
would soon own four, maybe even five goats, if one of those
nannies was big with twins. But he didn’t smile or act
surprised. “That’s good news,” he said, with even less
enthusiasm than he wanted to show. Not knowing what else
to say, Lamin dashed away without another word, hollering
for his wuolo dogs to reassemble his goats, which had
begun to wander.
Binta’s face kept a set, tight expression as she assisted
Kunta in moving to his own hut. His old clothes were all
outgrown, she said, and with her tone properly respectful,
added that whenever he had time for her to measure him
between the important things he had to do, she would sew
him some new clothes. Since he owned not much more
than his bow and arrows and his slingshot, Binta kept

murmuring, “You’ll need this” and “You’ll need that,” until she
had provided him with such household essentials as a
pallet, some bowls, a stool, and a prayer rug she had
woven while he was away. With each new thing, as he had
always heard his father do, Kunta would grunt, as if he
could think of no objection to having it in his house. When
she noticed him scratching his head, she offered to inspect
his scalp for ticks, and he bluntly told her “No!,” ignoring the
grumbling sounds she made afterward.
It was nearly midnight when Kunta finally slept, for much
was on his mind. And it seemed to him that his eyes had
hardly closed before the crowing cocks had waked him,
and then came the singsong call of the alimamo to the
mosque, for what would be the first morning prayer that he
and his mates would be allowed to attend with the other
men of Juffure. Dressing quickly, Kunta took his new prayer
rug and fell in among his kafo as, with heads bowed and
rolled prayer rugs under their arms—as if they had done it
all their lives—they entered the sacred mosque behind the
other men of the village. Inside, Kunta and the others
watched and copied every act and utterance of the older
men, being especially careful to be neither too soft nor too
loud in their reciting of the prayers.
After prayers, Binta brought breakfast to her new man’s
hut. Setting the bowl of steaming couscous before Kunta—
who just grunted again, not letting his face say anything—
Binta left quickly, and Kunta ate without pleasure, irritated
by a suspicion that she had seemed to be suppressing
something like mirth.
After breakfast, he joined his mates in undertaking their
duties as the eyes and ears of the village with a diligence
their elders found equally amusing. The women could hardly
turn around without finding one of the new men demanding
to inspect their cooking pots for insects. And rummaging
around outside peoples’ huts and all around the village
fence, they found hundreds of spots where the state of
repair failed to measure up to their exacting standards.
Fully a dozen of them drew up buckets of well water, tasting
carefully from the gourd dipper in hopes of detecting a

saltiness or a muddiness or something else unhealthy. They
were disappointed, but the fish and turtle that were kept in
the well to eat insects were removed anyway and replaced
with fresh ones.
The new men, in short, were everywhere. “They are thick
as fleas!” old Nyo Boto snorted as Kunta approached a
stream where she was pounding laundry on a rock, and he
all but sprinted off in another direction. He also took special
care to stay clear of any known place where Binta might be,
telling himself that although she was his mother, he would
show her no special favors; that, indeed, he would deal
firmly with her if she ever made it necessary. After all, she
was a woman.

CHAPTER 27
Juffure was so small, and its kafo of diligent new men so
numerous, it soon seemed to Kunta, that nearly every roof,
wall, calabash, and cooking pot in the village had been
inspected, cleaned, repaired, or replaced moments before
he got to it. But he was more pleased than disappointed,
for it gave him more time to spend farming the small plot
assigned to his use by the Council of Elders. All new men
grew their own couscous or groundnuts, some to live on
and the rest to trade—with those who grew too little to feed
their families—for things they needed more than food. A
young man who tended his crops well, made good trades,
and managed his goats wisely—perhaps swapping a
dozen goats for a female calf that would grow up and have
other calves—could move ahead in the world and become
a man of substance by the time he reached twenty-five or
thirty rains and began to think about taking a wife and
raising sons of his own.
Within a few moons after his return, Kunta had grown so
much more than he could eat himself, and made such
shrewd trades for this or that household possession to
adorn his hut, that Binta began to grumble about it within his
hearing. He had so many stools, wicker mats, food bowls,
gourds, and sundry other objects in his hut, she would
mutter, that there was hardly any room left inside for Kunta.
But he charitably chose to ignore her impertinence, since
he slept now upon a fine bed of woven reeds over a springy
bamboo mattress that she had spent half a moon making
for him.
In his hut, along with several saphies he had acquired in
exchange for crops from his farm plot, he kept a number of
other potent spiritual safeguards: the perfumed extracts of
certain plants and barks which, like every other Mandinka
man, Kunta rubbed onto his forehead, upper arms, and
thighs each night before going to bed. It was believed that
this magical essence would protect a man from possession

by evil spirits while he slept. It would also make him smell
good—a thing that, along with his appearance, Kunta had
begun to think about.
He and the rest of his kafo were becoming increasingly
exasperated about a matter that had been rankling their
manly pride for many moons. When they went off to
manhood training, they had left behind a group of skinny,
giggling, silly little girls who played almost as hard as the
boys. Then, after only four moons away, they had returned
—as new men—to find these same girls, with whom they
had grown up, flouncing about wherever one looked, poking
out their mango-sized breasts, tossing their heads and
arms, showing off their jangly new earrings, beads, and
bracelets. What irritated Kunta and the others wasn’t so
much that the girls were behaving so absurdly, but that they
seemed to be doing so exclusively for the benefit of men at
least ten rains older than themselves. For new men like
Kunta, these maidens of marriageable age—fourteen and
fifteen—had scarcely a glance except to sneer or laugh. He
and his mates finally grew so disgusted with these airs and
antics that they resolved to pay no further attention either to
the girls or to the all-too-willing older men they sought to
entice with such fluttery coyness.
But Kunta’s foto would be as hard as his thumb some
mornings when he waked. Of course, it had been hard
many times before, even when he was Lamin’s age; but
now it was much different in the feeling, very deep and
strong. And Kunta couldn’t help putting his hand down
under his bedcover and tightly squeezing it. He also
couldn’t help thinking about things he and his mates had
overheard—about fotos being put into women.
One night dreaming—for ever since he was a small boy,
Kunta had dreamed a great deal, even when he was
awake, Binta liked to say—he found himself watching a
harvest-festival seoruba, when the loveliest, longestnecked, sootiest-black maiden there chose to fling down
her headwrap for him to pick up. When he did so, she
rushed home shouting, “Kunta likes me!,” and after careful
consideration, her parents gave permission for them to

marry. Omoro and Binta also agreed, and both fathers
bargained for the bride price. “She is beautiful,” said
Omoro, “but my concerns are of her true value as my son’s
wife. Is she a strong, hard worker? Is she of pleasant
disposition in the home? Can she cook well and care for
children? And above all, is she guaranteed a virgin?” The
answers were all yes, so a price was decided and a date
set for the wedding.
Kunta built a fine new mud house, and both mothers
cooked bountiful delicacies, to give guests the best
impression. And on the wedding day, the adults, children,
goats, chickens, dogs, parrots, and monkeys all but
drowned out the musicians they had hired. When the
bride’s party arrived, the praise singer shouted of the fine
families being joined together. Yet louder shouts rose when
the bride’s best girlfriends roughly shoved her inside
Kunta’s new house. Grinning and waving to everyone,
Kunta followed her and drew the curtain across the door.
When she had seated herself on his bed, he sang to her a
famous ancestral song of love: “Mandumbe, your long neck
is very beautiful....” Then they lay down on soft cured hides
and she kissed him tenderly, and they clung together very
tightly. And then the thing happened, as Kunta had come to
imagine it from the ways it had been described to him. It
was even greater than he had been told, and the feeling
grew and grew—until finally he burst.
Jerking suddenly awake, Kunta lay very still for a long
moment, trying to figure out what had happened. Then,
moving his hand down between his legs, he felt the warm
wetness on himself—and on his bed. Frightened and
alarmed, he leaped up, felt for a cloth, and wiped himself
off, and the bed, too. Then, sitting there in the darkness, his
fear was slowly overtaken by embarrassment, his
embarrassment by shame, his shame by pleasure, and his
pleasure, finally, by a kind of pride. Had this ever happened
to any of his mates? he wondered. Though he hoped it had,
he also hoped it hadn’t, for perhaps this is what happens
when one really becomes a man, he thought; and he
wanted to be the first. But Kunta knew that he would never

know, for this experience and even these thoughts weren’t
the kind he could ever share with anyone. Finally,
exhausted and exhilarated, he lay down again and soon fell
into a mercifully dreamless sleep.

CHAPTER 28
Kunta knew every man, woman, child, dog, and goat in
Juffure, he told himself one afternoon while he sat eating
lunch beside his plot of groundnuts, and in the course of his
new duties, he either saw or spoke with almost all of them
nearly every day. Why, then, did he feel so alone? Was he
an orphan? Did he not have a father who treated him as
one man should another? Did he not have a mother who
tended dutifully to his needs? Did he not have brothers to
look up to him? As a new man, was he not their idol? Did
he not have the friendship of those with whom he had
played in the mud as children, herded goats as boys,
returned to Juffure as men? Had he not earned the respect
of his elders—and the envy of his kafo mates—for
husbanding his farm plot into seven goats, three chickens,
and a splendidly furnished hut before reaching his sixteenth
birthday? He couldn’t deny it.
And yet he was lonely. Omoro was too busy to spend
even as much time with Kunta as he had when he had only
one son and fewer responsibilities in the village. Binta was
busy too, taking care of Kunta’s younger brothers, but his
mother and he had little to say to one another anyway. Even
he and Lamin were no longer close; while he had been
away at the jujuo, Suwadu had become Lamin’s adoring
shadow as Lamin had once been Kunta’s, and Kunta
watched with mixed emotions while Lamin’s attitude toward
his little brother warmed from irritation to toleration to
affection. Soon they were inseparable, and this had left as
little room for Kunta as it had for Madi, who was too young
yet to join them but old enough to whine because they
wouldn’t let him. On days when the two older boys couldn’t
get out of their mother’s hut fast enough, of course, Binta
would often order them to take Madi along, so that she
could get him out from underfoot, and Kunta would have to
smile in spite of himself at the sight of his three brothers
marching around the village, one behind the other, in the

order of their births, with the two in front staring glumly
ahead while the little one, smiling happily, brought up the
rear, almost running to keep up.
No one walked behind Kunta any longer, and not often
did anyone choose to walk beside him either, for his kafo
mates were occupied almost every waking hour with their
new duties and—perhaps, like him—with their own
broodings about what had so far proved to be the dubious
rewards of manhood. True, they had been given their own
farm plots and were beginning to collect goats and other
possessions. But the plots were small, the work hard, and
their possessions were embarrassingly few in comparison
to those of older men. They had also been made the eyes
and ears of the village, but the cooking pots were kept
clean without their supervision, and nothing ever
trespassed in the fields except occasional baboon families
or dense flocks of birds. Their elders, it soon became clear,
got to do all the really important jobs, and as if to rub it in,
gave the new men only what they felt was the appearance
of respect, as they had been given only the appearance of
responsibility. Indeed, when they paid any attention at all to
the younger men, the elders seemed to have as much
difficulty as the young girls of the village in restraining
themselves from laughter, even when one of them
performed the most challenging task without a mistake.
Well, someday he would be one of those older men, Kunta
told himself, and he would wear the mantle of manhood not
only with more dignity but also with more compassion and
understanding toward younger men than he and his mates
received now.
Feeling restless—and a little sorry for himself—that
evening, Kunta left his hut to take a solitary walk. Though he
had no destination in mind, his feet drew him toward the
circle of rapt children’s faces glowing in the light of the
campfire around which the old grandmothers were telling
their nightly stories to the first kafo of the village. Stopping
close enough to listen—but not close enough to be noticed
listening—Kunta squatted down on his haunches and
pretended to be inspecting a rock at his feet while one of

the wrinkled old women waved her skinny arms and jumped
around the clearing in front of the children as she acted out
her story of the four thousand brave warriors of the King of
Kasoon who had been driven into battle by the thunder of
five hundred great war drums and the trumpeting of five
hundred elephant-tusk horns. It was a story he had heard
many times around the fires as a child, and as he looked at
the wide-eyed faces of his Madi in the front row, and
Suwadu in the back row, it somehow made him feel sad to
hear it again.
With a sigh, he rose and walked slowly away—his
departure as unnoticed as his arrival had been. At the fire
where Lamin sat with other boys his age chanting their
Koranic verses, and the fire where Binta sat with other
mothers gossiping about husbands, households, children,
cooking, sewing, makeup, and hairdos, he felt equally
unwelcome. Passing them by, he found himself finally
beneath the spreading branches of the baobab where the
men of Juffure sat around the fourth fire discussing village
business and other matters of gravity. As he had felt too old
to be wanted around the first fire, he felt too young to be
wanted around this one. But he had no place else to go, so
Kunta seated himself among those in the outer circle—
beyond those of Omoro’s age, who sat closer to the fire,
and those of the kintango’s age, who sat closest, among
the Council of Elders. As he did so, he heard one of them
ask:
“Can anyone say how many of us are getting stolen?”
They were discussing slave taking, which had been the
main subject around the men’s fire for the more than one
hundred rains that toubob had been stealing people and
shipping them in chains to the kingdom of white cannibals
across the sea.
There was silence for a little while, and then the alimamo
said, “We can only thank Allah that it’s less now than it
was.”
“There are fewer of us left to steal!” said an angry elder.
“I listen to the drums and count the lost,” said the
kintango.

“Fifty to sixty each new moon just from along our part of
the bolong would be my guess.” No one said anything to
that, and he added, “There is no way, of course, to count
the losses farther inland, and farther up the river.”
“Why do we count only those taken away by the toubob?”
asked the arafang. “We must count also the burned
baobabs where villages once stood. He has killed more in
fires and in fighting him than he has ever taken away!”
The men stared at the fire for a long time, and then
another elder broke the silence: “Toubob could never do
this without help from our own people. Mandinkas, Fulas,
Wolofs, Jolas—none of The Gambia’s tribes is without its
slatee traitors. As a child I saw these slatees beating those
like themselves to walk faster for the toubob!”
“For toubob money, we turn against our own kind,” said
Juffure’s senior elder. “Greed and treason—these are the
things toubob has given us in exchange for those he has
stolen away.”
No one talked again for a while, and the fire sputtered
quietly. Then the kintango spoke again: “Even worse than
toubob’s money is that he lies for nothing and he cheats
with method, as naturally as he breathes. That’s what gives
him the advantage over us.”
A few moments passed, and then a young man of the
kafo ahead of Kunta’s asked, “Will toubob never change?”
“That will be,” said one of the elders, “when the river flows
backward!”
Soon the fire was a pile of smoking embers, and the men
began to get up, stretch themselves, wish one another
good night, and head home to their huts. But five young
men of the third kafo stayed behind—one to cover with dust
the warm ashes of all the fires, and the rest, including
Kunta, to take the late shift as village lookouts beyond each
corner of Juffure’s high bamboo fence. After such alarming
talk around the fire, Kunta knew he would have no trouble
staying awake, but he didn’t look forward to spending this
particular night beyond the safety of the village.
Ambling through Juffure and out the gate with what he
hoped was nonchalance, Kunta waved to his fellow guards

and made his way along the outside of the fence—past the
sharp-thorned bushes piled thickly against it, and the
pointed stakes concealed beneath them—to a leafy hiding
place that afforded him a silvery view of the surrounding
countryside on this moonlit night. Getting as comfortable as
he could, he slung his spear across his lap, drew up his
knees, clasped his arms around them for warmth, and
settled in for the night. Scanning the bush with straining
eyes for any sign of movement, he listened to the shrilling of
crickets, the eerie whistling of nightbirds, the distant
howling of hyenas, and the shrieks of unwary animals taken
by surprise, and he thought about the things the men had
said around the fire. When dawn came without an incident,
he was almost as surprised that he hadn’t been set upon by
slave stealers as he was to realize that for the first time in a
moon, he hadn’t spent a moment worrying about his
personal problems.

CHAPTER 29
Nearly every day, it seemed to Kunta, Binta would irritate
him about something. It wasn’t anything she would do or
say, but in other ways—little looks, certain tones of voice—
Kunta could tell she disapproved of something about him. It
was worst when Kunta added to his possessions new
things that Binta hadn’t obtained for him herself. One
morning, arriving to serve his breakfast, Binta nearly
dropped the steaming couscous upon Kunta when she saw
he was wearing his first dundiko not sewn with her own
hands. Feeling guilty for having traded a cured hyena hide
to get it, Kunta angrily offered her no explanation, though he
could feel that his mother was deeply hurt.
From that morning on, he knew that Binta never brought
his meals without her eyes raking every item in his hut to
see if there was anything else—a stool, a mat, a bucket, a
plate, or a pot—that she’d had nothing to do with. If
something new had appeared, Binta’s sharp eyes would
never miss it. Kunta would sit there fuming while she put on
that look of not caring and not noticing that he had seen her
wear so many times around Omoro, who knew as well as
Kunta did that Binta could hardly wait to get to the village
well among her women friends so that she could loudly
bemoan her troubles—which was what all Mandinka
women did when they disagreed with their husbands.
One day, before his mother arrived with the morning
meal, Kunta picked up a beautifully woven basket that Jinna
M’Baki, one of Juffure’s several widows, had given him as
a gift, and he set it just inside the door of his hut, where his
mother would be sure to all but stumble over it. The widow
was actually a little younger than Binta, it occurred to him.
While Kunta was still a second-kafo goatherd, her husband
had gone away to hunt and never returned. She lived quite
near Nyo Boto, whom Kunta often visited, and that was how
he and the widow had seen each other and come to speak
to each other as Kunta had grown older. It had annoyed

Kunta when the widow’s gift caused some of Kunta’s
friends to tease him about her reason for giving him a
valuable bamboo basket. When Binta arrived at his hut and
saw it—recognizing the widow’s style of weaving—she
flinched as if the basket were a scorpion before managing
to compose herself.
She didn’t say a word about it, of course, but Kunta knew
he had made his point. He was no longer a boy, and it was
time for her to stop acting like his mother. He felt it was his
own responsibility to change her in that regard. It wasn’t
something to speak to Omoro about, for Kunta knew he
couldn’t put himself into the ridiculous position of asking
Omoro’s advice on how to make Binta respect her son the
same as she did her husband. Kunta thought about
discussing his problem with Nyo Boto, but changed his
mind when he recalled how peculiarly she had acted toward
him upon his return from manhood training.
So Kunta kept his own counsel, and before long he
decided not to go any more into Binta’s hut, where he had
lived most of his life. And when Binta brought his meals, he
would sit stiffly silent while she set his food on the mat
before him and left without speaking or even looking at him.
Kunta finally began thinking seriously of seeking out some
new eating arrangement. Most of the other new young men
still ate from their mothers’ kitchens, but some were cooked
for by an older sister or a sister-in-law. If Binta got any
worse, Kunta told himself, he was going to find some other
woman to cook for him—perhaps the widow who had given
him the woven basket. He knew without asking that she
would gladly cook for him—and yet Kunta didn’t want to let
her know that he was even considering such a thing. In the
meantime, he and his mother continued to meet at
mealtimes—and to act as if they didn’t even see each
other.
Early one morning, returning from a night of sentry duty
out in the groundnut fields, Kunta saw hurrying along the
trail some distance ahead of him three young men whom
he could tell were about his own age, and whom he knew
had to be travelers from somewhere else. Shouting until

they turned around, he went running to meet and greet
them. They told Kunta they were from the village of Barra, a
day and a night of walking from Juffure, and they were on
their way to hunt for gold. They were of the Feloop tribe,
which was a branch of Mandinka, but he had to listen
carefully to understand them, as they did to understand him.
It made Kunta remember his visit with his father to his
uncle’s new village, where he couldn’t understand what
some people were saying, although they lived only two or
three days away from Juffure.
Kunta was intrigued by the trip the young men were
taking. He thought it might also interest some of his friends,
so he asked the young men to stop in his village for a day
of hospitality before they went on. But they graciously
refused the invitation, saying that they had to reach the
place where the gold could be panned by the third
afternoon of travel. “But why don’t you come along with us?”
one of the young men asked Kunta.
Never having dreamed of such a thing, Kunta was so
taken aback that he found himself saying no, telling them
that as much as he appreciated the offer, he had much
work to do on his farm, as well as other duties. And the
three young men expressed their regret. “If you should
change your mind, please join us,” one said. And they got
down on their knees and drew in the dust to show Kunta
where the gold-hunting place was located—about two days
and nights of travel beyond Juffure. The father of one of the
boys, a traveling musician, had told them where it was.
Kunta walked along talking with his newfound friends until
they came to where the travelers’ trail forked. After the three
men took the fork that led on past Juffure—and turned to
wave back at him—Kunta walked slowly home. He was
thinking hard as he entered his hut and lay down on his
bed, and though he had been awake all night, he still
couldn’t seem to fall asleep. Perhaps he might go to hunt
gold after all if he could find a friend to tend his farm plot.
And he knew that someone of his mates would take over
his sentry duties if they were only asked—as he would
gladly do if they asked him.

Kunta’s next thought hit him so hard it made him leap
right up out of bed: As a man now, he could take Lamin
along, as his father had once taken him. For the next hour
Kunta paced the dirt floor of his hut, his mind wrestling with
the questions raised by this exciting thought. First of all,
would Omoro permit such a trip for Lamin, who was yet a
boy and thus required his father’s approval? It galled Kunta
enough, as a man, to have to ask permission for anything,
but suppose Omoro said no? And how would his three new
friends feel about it if he showed up with his little brother?
Come to think of it, Kunta wondered why he was pacing
the floor, and risking serious embarrassment, just to do a
favor for Lamin. After all, ever since he had returned from
manhood training, Lamin hadn’t even been that close to
him any more. But Kunta knew that this wasn’t something
that either of them wanted. They had really enjoyed each
other before Kunta went away. But now Lamin’s time was
taken up by Suwadu, who was always hanging around his
bigger brother in the same way that Lamin used to hang
around Kunta, full of pride and admiration. But Kunta felt
that Lamin had never quit feeling that way about him. If
anything, he felt that Lamin admired his big brother even
more than before. It was just that some kind of distance had
come between them because of his having become a man.
Men simply spent no great deal of time with boys; and even
if that wasn’t as he and Lamin wanted it, there just seemed
no way for either of them to crack through it—until Kunta
thought of taking Lamin along on his gold-hunting trip.
“Lamin is a good boy. He displays his home training well.
And he takes good care of my goats,” was Kunta’s opening
comment to Omoro, for Kunta knew that men almost never
began conversations directly with what they meant to
discuss. Omoro, of course, knew this, too. He nodded
slowly and replied: “Yes, I would say that is true.” As calmly
as he could, Kunta then told his father of meeting his three
new friends and of their invitation to join them in hunting for
gold. Taking a deep breath, Kunta said finally, “I’ve been
thinking that Lamin might enjoy the trip.”
Omoro’s face showed not a flicker of expression. A long

moment passed before he spoke. “For a boy to travel is
good,” he said—and Kunta knew that his father was at least
not going to say no absolutely. In some way, Kunta could
feel his father’s trust in him, but also his concern, which he
knew Omoro didn’t want to express any more strongly than
he had to. “It has been rains since I’ve had any travel in that
area. I seem not to remember that trail’s route very well,”
said Omoro, as casually as if they were merely discussing
the weather. Kunta knew that his father—whom Kunta had
never known to forget anything—was trying to find out if he
knew the route to the gold-hunting place.
Dropping onto his knees in the dust, Kunta drew the trail
with a stick as if he had known it for years. He drew circles
to show the villages that were both near the trail and at
some distance from it along the way. Omoro got down onto
his knees as well, and when Kunta had finished drawing the
trail, said, “I would go so as to pass close by the most
villages. It will take a little longer, but it will be the safest.”
Kunta nodded, hoping that he appeared more confident
than he suddenly felt. The thought hit him that though the
three friends he had met, traveling together, could catch
each other’s mistakes—if they made any—he, traveling
with a younger brother for whom he would be responsible,
would have no one to help if something went wrong.
Then Kunta saw Omoro’s finger circling the last third of
the trail. “In this area, few speak Mandinka,” Omoro said.
Kunta remembered the lessons of his manhood training
and looked into his father’s eyes. “The sun and the stars will
tell me the way,” he said.
A long moment passed, and then Omoro spoke again. “I
think I’ll go by your mother’s house.” Kunta’s heart leaped.
He knew it was his father’s way of saying that his
permission was given, and he felt it best that he personally
make his decision known to Binta.
Omoro wasn’t long in Binta’s hut. He had hardly left to
return to his own when she burst out her door, hands
pressed tightly to her shaking head. “Madi! Suwadu!” she
shrieked, and they came rushing to her from among the
other children.

Now other mothers came from their huts, and unmarried
girls, all rushing behind Binta as she began hollering and
pulling the two boys alongside her toward the well. Once
there, all of the women crowded about her as she wept and
moaned that now she had only two children left, that her
others certainly would soon be lost to toubob.
A second-kafo girl, unable to contain the news of Kunta’s
trip with Lamin, raced all the way out to where the boys of
her kafo were grazing the goats. A short time later, back in
the village, heads jerked around with smiles on their faces
as a deliriously joyful boy came whooping into the village in
a manner fit to wake the ancestors. Catching up with his
mother just outside her hut, Lamin—though still a hand’s
span shorter than her—bearhugged Binta, planted big
kisses on her forehead and swept her whirling up off her
feet as she shouted to be put down. Once back on the
ground, she ran to pick up a nearby piece of wood and
struck Lamin with it. She would have done it again, but he
dashed away—feeling no pain—toward Kunta’s hut. He
didn’t even knock as he burst inside. It was an unthinkable
intrusion into a man’s house—but after a glimpse at his
brother’s face, Kunta had to overlook it. Lamin just stood
there, looking up into the face of his big brother. The boy’s
mouth was trying to say something; indeed, his whole body
was trembling, and Kunta had to catch himself to keep from
grabbing and hugging Lamin in the rush of love he felt
passing between them in that moment.
Kunta heard himself speaking, his tone almost gruff. “I
see you’ve already heard. We’ll leave tomorrow after first
prayer.”
Man or not, Kunta took care to walk nowhere near Binta
as he made several quick calls to see friends about caring
for his farm and filling in for him on sentry duty. Kunta could
tell where Binta was from the sound of her wailing as she
marched around the village holding Madi and Suwadu by
the hand. “These two only I have left!” she cried, as loudly
as she could. But like everyone else in Juffure, she knew
that no matter what she felt or said or did, Omoro had
spoken.

CHAPTER 30
At the travelers’ tree, Kunta prayed for their journey to be a
safe one. So that it would be a prosperous one as well, he
tied the chicken he had brought along to a lower branch by
one of its legs, leaving it flapping and squawking there as
he and Lamin set forth on the trail. Though he didn’t turn
back to look, Kunta knew Lamin was trying very hard to
keep pace with him, and to keep his headload balanced—
and to keep Kunta from noticing either.
After an hour, the trail took them by a low, spreading tree
strung thickly with beads. Kunta wanted to explain to Lamin
how such a tree meant that living nearby were some of the
few Mandinkas who were kafirs, pagan unbelievers who
used snuff and smoked tobacco in pipes made of wood
with earthen bowls, and also drank a beer they made of
mead. But more important than that knowledge was for
Lamin to learn the discipline of silent marching. By
noontime, Kunta knew that Lamin’s feet and legs would be
hurting him badly, and also his neck under the heavy
headload. But it was only by keeping on despite pain that a
boy could toughen his body and his spirit. At the same time,
Kunta knew that Lamin must stop for rest before he
collapsed, which would hurt his pride.
Taking the bypass trail to miss the first village they
passed, they soon shook off the naked little first-kafo
children who raced out to inspect them. Kunta still didn’t
look back, but he knew that Lamin would have quickened
his pace and straightened his back for the children’s
benefit. But as they left the children and the village behind,
Kunta’s mind drifted off Lamin to other things. He thought
again of the drum he was going to make for himself—
making it first in his mind, as the men did who carved out
masks and figures. For the drum’s head, he had a young
goat’s skin already scraped and curing in his hut, and he
knew just the place—only a short trot beyond the women’s
rice fields—where he could find the tough wood he needed

for a strong drumframe. Kunta could almost hear how his
drum was going to sound.
As the trail took them into a grove of trees close by the
path, Kunta tightened his grip on the spear he carried, as
he had been taught to do. Cautiously, he continued walking
—then stopped and listened very quietly. Lamin stood
wide-eyed behind him, afraid to breathe. A moment later,
however, his big brother relaxed and began walking again,
toward what Kunta recognized—with relief—as the sound
of several men singing a working song. Soon he and Lamin
came into a clearing and saw twelve men dragging a
dugout canoe with ropes. They had felled a tree and burned
and chopped it out, and now they were starting to move it
the long way to the river. After each haul on the ropes, they
sang the next line of the song, each one ending “All
together!,” then again, straining hard, as they moved the
dugout about another arm’s length. Waving to the men, who
waved back, Kunta passed them and made a mental note
to tell Lamin later who these men were and why they had
made the canoe from a tree that grew here in the forest
rather than near the riverbank: They were from the village of
Kerewan, where they made the best Mandinka dugouts;
and they knew that only forest trees would float.
Kunta thought with a rush of warmth about the three
young men from Barra whom they were traveling to meet. It
was strange that though they never had seen each other
before, they seemed as brothers. Perhaps it was because
they too were Mandinkas. They said things differently than
he did, but they weren’t different inside. Like them, he had
decided to leave his village to seek his fortune—and a little
excitement—before returning to their homes ahead of the
next big rains.
When the time neared for the alansaro prayer in
midafternoon, Kunta stepped off the trail where a small
stream ran among trees. Not looking at Lamin, he slipped
off his headload, flexed himself, and bent to scoop up
handfuls of water in order to splash his face. He drank
sparingly, then, in the midst of his prayer, he heard Lamin’s
headload thud to the earth. Springing up at the end of the

prayer intending to rebuke him, he saw how painfully his
brother was crawling toward the water. But Kunta still made
his voice hard: “Sip a little at a time!” As Lamin drank,
Kunta decided that an hour’s resting here would be long
enough. After eating a few bites of food, he thought, Lamin
should be able to keep walking until time for the fitiro
prayer, at about dusk, when a fuller meal and a night’s rest
would be welcomed by them both.
But Lamin was too tired even to eat. He lay where he had
drunk from the stream, face down with his arms flung out,
palms up. Kunta stepped over quietly to look at the soles of
his feet; they weren’t bleeding yet. Then Kunta himself
catnapped, and when he got up he took from his headload
enough dried meat for two. Shaking Lamin awake, he gave
him his meat and ate his own. Soon they were back on the
trail, which made all the turns and passed all the landmarks
the young men from Barra had drawn for Kunta. Near one
village, they saw two old grandmothers and two young girls
with some first-kafo children busily catching crabs, darting
their hands into a little stream and snatching out their prey.
Near dusk, as Lamin began to grab more and more often
at his headload, Kunta saw ahead a flock of large bushfowl
circling down to land. Abruptly he stopped, concealing
himself, as Lamin sank onto his knees behind a bush
nearby. Kunta pursed his lips, making the male bushfowl
mating call, and shortly several fat, fine hens came flapping
and waddling over. They were cocking their heads and
looking around when Kunta’s arrow went straight through
one. Jerking its head off, he let the blood drain out, and
while the bird roasted he built a rough bush shelter, then
prayed. He also roasted some ears of wild corn that he had
plucked along the way before awakening Lamin, who had
fallen asleep again the moment they put their headloads
down. Hardly had Lamin wolfed down his meal before he
flopped back down onto the soft moss under a slanting roof
of leafy boughs and went back to sleep without a murmur.
Kunta sat hugging his knees in the night’s still air. Not far
away, hyenas began yipping. For some time, he diverted
himself by identifying the other sounds of the forest. Then

three times he faintly heard a melodious horn. He knew it
was the next village’s final prayer call, blown by their
alimamo through a hollowed elephant’s tooth. He wished
that Lamin had been awake to hear its haunting cry, which
was almost like a human voice, but then he smiled, for his
brother was beyond caring what anything sounded like.
Then himself praying, Kunta also slept.
Soon after sunrise, they were passing that village and
hearing the drumming rhythm of the women’s pestles
pounding couscous for breakfast porridge. Kunta could
almost taste it; but they didn’t stop. Not far beyond, down
the trail, was another village, and as they went by, the men
were leaving their mosque and the women were bustling
around their cooking fires. Still farther on, Kunta saw ahead
of them an old man sitting beside the trail. He was bent
nearly double over a number of cowrie shells, which he was
shuffling and reshuffling on a plaited bamboo mat while
mumbling to himself. Not to interrupt him, Kunta was about
to pass by when the old man looked up and hailed them
over to where he sat.
“I come from the village of Kootacunda, which is in the
kingdom of Wooli, where the sun rises over the Simbani
forest,” he said in a high, cracking voice. “And where may
you be from?” Kunta told him the village of Juffure, and the
old man nodded. “I have heard of it.” He was consulting his
cowries, he said, to learn their next message about his
journey to the city of Timbuktu, “which I want to see before I
die,” and he wondered if the travelers would care to be of
any help to him. “We are poor, but happy to share whatever
we have with you, Grandfather,” said Kunta, easing off his
headload, reaching within it and withdrawing some dried
meat, which he gave the old man, who thanked him and put
the food in his lap.
Peering at them both, he asked, “You are brothers
traveling?”
“We are, Grandfather,” Kunta replied.
“That is good!” the old man said, and picked up two of
his cowries. “Add this to those on your hunting bag, and it
will bring you a fine profit,” he said to Kunta, handing him

one of the cowries. “And you, young man,” he said to
Lamin, giving him the other, “keep this for when you
become a man with a bag of your own.” They both thanked
him, and he wished them Allah’s blessings.
They had walked on for quite a while when Kunta
decided that the time was ripe to break his silence with
Lamin. Without stopping or turning, he began to speak:
“There is a legend, little brother, that it was traveling
Mandinkas who named the place where that old man is
bound. They found there a kind of insect they had never
seen before and named the place ‘Tumbo Kutu,’ which
means ‘new insect.’” When there was no response from
Lamin, Kunta turned his head; Lamin was well behind, bent
down over his headload—which had fallen open on the
ground—and struggling to tie it back together. As Kunta
trotted back, he realized that Lamin’s grabbing at his
headload had finally caused it to work its bindings loose
and that he had somehow eased it off his head without
making any noise, not wanting to break the rule of silence
by asking Kunta to stop. While Kunta was retying the
headload, he saw that Lamin’s feet were bleeding, but this
was to be expected, so he said nothing of it. The tears
shone in Lamin’s eyes as he got the load back on his head,
and they went on. Kunta upbraided himself that he hadn’t
missed Lamin’s presence and might have left him behind.
They hadn’t walked much farther when Lamin let out a
choked scream. Thinking he had stepped on a thorn, Kunta
turned—and saw his brother staring upward at a big
panther flattened on the limb they would have walked under
in another moment. The panther went sssss, then seemed
to flow almost lazily into the branches of a tree and was
gone from sight. Shaken, Kunta resumed walking, alarmed
and angry and embarrassed at himself. Why had he not
seen that panther? The odds were that it was only wishing
to remain unseen and wouldn’t have sprung down upon
them, for unless the big cats were extremely hungry, they
rarely attacked even their animal prey during the daylight,
and humans seldom at any time, unless they were
cornered, provoked, or wounded. Still, a picture flashed

through Kunta’s memory of the panther-mangled nanny
goat from his goat-herding days. He could almost hear the
kintango’s stern warning: “The hunter’s senses must be
fine. He must hear what others cannot, smell what others
cannot. He must see through the darkness.” But while he
had been walking along with his own thoughts wandering, it
was Lamin who had seen the panther. Most of his bad
troubles had come from that habit, which he absolutely must
correct, he thought. Bending quickly without breaking pace,
Kunta picked up a small stone, spit on it three times, and
hurled it far back down the trail, the stone having thus
carried behind them the spirits of misfortune.
They walked on with the sun burning down upon them as
the country gradually changed from green forest to oil
palms and muddy, dozing creeks, taking them past hot,
dusty villages where—just as in Juffure—first-kafo children
ran and screamed around in packs, where men lounged
under the baobab and women gossiped beside the well.
But Kunta wondered why they let their goats wander around
these villages, along with the dogs and chickens, rather
than keep them either out grazing or penned up, as in
Juffure. He decided that they must be an odd, different kind
of people.
They pushed on over grassless, sandy soil sprinkled with
the burst dry fruit of weirdly shaped baobabs. When the
time came to pray, they rested and ate lightly, and Kunta
would check Lamin’s headbundle and his feet, whose
bleeding was not so bad any more. And the crossroads
kept unfolding like a picture, until finally there was the huge
old shell of a baobab that the young men from Barra had
described. It must have been hundreds of rains old to be
dying at last, he thought, and he told Lamin what one of the
young men had told him: “A griot rests inside there,” adding
from his own knowledge that griots were always buried not
as other people were but within the shells of ancient
baobabs, since both the trees and the histories in the
heads of griots were timeless. “We’re close now,” Kunta
said, and he wished he had the drum he was going to
make, so that he could signal ahead to his friends. With the

sinking of the sun, they finally reached the clay pits—and
there were the three young men.
“We felt you would come!” they shouted, happy to see
him. They merely ignored Lamin as if he were their own
second-kafo brother. Amid brisk talk, the three young men
proudly showed the tiny grains of gold they had collected.
By the next morning’s first light, Kunta and Lamin had
joined in, chopping up chunks of sticky clay, which they
dropped into large calabashes of water. After whirling the
calabash, then slowly pouring off most of the muddy water,
they carefully felt with their fingers to see if any gold grains
had sunk to the bottom. Now and then there was a grain as
tiny as a millet seed, or maybe a little larger.
They worked so feverishly that there was no time for talk.
Lamin seemed even to forget his aching muscles in the
search for gold. And each precious grain went carefully into
the hollow of the largest quills from bush pigeons’ wings,
stoppered with a bit of cotton. Kunta and Lamin had six
quills full when the three young men said they’d collected
enough. Now, they said, they’d like to go farther up the trail,
deeper into the interior of the country, to hunt elephants’
teeth. They said they had been told where old elephants
sometimes broke off their teeth in trying to uproot small
trees and thick brush while feeding. They had heard also
that if one could ever find the secret graveyards of the
elephants, a fortune in teeth would be there. Would Kunta
join them? He was sorely tempted; this sounded even more
exciting than hunting for gold. But he couldn’t go—not with
Lamin. Sadly he thanked them for the invitation and said he
must return home with his brother. So warm farewells were
exchanged, but not before Kunta had made the young men
accept his invitation to stop for hospitality in Juffure on their
way home to Barra.
The trip back seemed shorter to Kunta. Lamin’s feet bled
worse, but he walked faster when Kunta handed him the
quills to carry, saying “Your mother should enjoy these.”
Lamin’s happiness was no greater than his own at having
taken his brother traveling, just as their father had done for
him—just as Lamin would one day take Suwadu, and

Suwadu would take Madi. They were approaching Juffure’s
travelers’ tree when Kunta heard Lamin’s headload fall off
again. Kunta whirled angrily, but then he saw his brother’s
pleading expression. “All right, get it later!” he snapped.
Without a word, his aching muscles and his bleeding feet
forgotten, Lamin bolted past Kunta for the village, his thin
legs racing faster than they’d ever taken him.
By the time Kunta entered the village gate, excited
women and children were clustered around Binta, who was
sticking the six quills of gold into her hair, clearly bursting
with relief and happiness. A moment later, Binta’s and
Kunta’s faces exchanged a look of tenderness and warmth
far beyond the usual greetings that passed between mother
and her grown-up son home from traveling. The women’s
clacking tongues soon let everyone in Juffure know what the
two oldest Kinte sons had brought home with them.
“There’s a cow on Binta’s head!” shouted an old
grandmother—there was enough gold in the quills to buy a
cow—and the rest of the women took up that cry.
“You did well,” said Omoro simply when Kunta met him.
But the feeling they shared without further words was even
greater than with Binta. In the days that followed, elders
seeing Kunta around the village began to speak to him and
smile in a special way, and he solemnly replied with his
respects. Even Suwadu’s little second-kafo mates greeted
Kunta as a grown-up, saying “Peace!” and then standing
with palms folded over their chests until he passed by.
Kunta even chanced to overhear Binta one day gossiping
about “the two men I feed,” and he was filled with pride that
his mother had finally realized he was a man.
It was all right with Kunta now not only for Binta to feed
him, but even to do such things as searching on Kunta’s
head for ticks, as she had been resenting not doing. And
Kunta felt it all right now also to visit her hut again now and
then. As for Binta, she bustled about all smiles, even
humming to herself as she cooked. In an offhand manner,
Kunta would ask if she needed him to do anything, she
would say so if she did, and he did whatever it was as soon
as he could. If he but glanced at Lamin or Suwadu, when

they were playing too loudly, for example, they were
instantly still and quiet. And Kunta liked tossing Madi into
the air, catching him as he fell, and Madi liked it even more.
As for Lamin, he clearly regarded his man-brother as
ranking second only to Allah. He cared for Kunta’s seven
goats—which were multiplying well—as if they were goats
of gold, and he eagerly helped Kunta to raise his small farm
plot of couscous and groundnuts.
Whenever Binta needed to get some work done around
the hut, Kunta would take all three children off her hands,
and she would stand smiling in her doorway as he marched
off with Madi on his shoulder, Lamin following—strutting like
a rooster—and Suwadu jealously tagging along behind. It
was nice, thought Kunta—so nice that he caught himself
wishing that he might have a family of his own like this
someday. But not until the time comes, of course, he told
himself, and that’s a long way off.

CHAPTER 31
As new men were permitted to do whenever there was no
conflict with their duties, Kunta and others of his kafo would
sit at the outermost edges of the formal sessions of the
Council of Elders, which were held once each moon under
Juffure’s ancient baobab. Sitting beneath it on cured hides
very close together, the six senior elders seemed almost as
old as the tree, Kunta thought, and to have been carved
from the same wood, except that they were as black as
ebony against the white of their long robes and round
skullcaps. Seated facing them were those with troubles or
disputes to be resolved. Behind the petitioners, in rows,
according to their ages, sat junior elders such as Omoro,
and behind them sat the new men of Kunta’s kafo. And
behind them the village women could sit, though they rarely
attended except when someone in their immediate family
was involved in a matter to be heard. Once in a long while,
all the women would be present—but only if a case held the
promise of some juicy gossip.
No women at all attended when the Council met to
discuss purely administrative affairs, such as Juffure’s
relationship with other villages. On the day for matters of the
people, however, the audience was large and noisy—but all
settled quickly into silence when the most senior of the
elders raised his stick, sewn with bright-colored beads, to
strike out on the talking drum before him the name of the
first person to be heard. This was done according to their
ages, to serve the needs of the oldest first. Whoever it was
would stand, stating his case, the senior elders all staring at
the ground, listening until he finished and sat down. At this
point, any of the elders might ask him questions.
If the matter involved a dispute, the second person now
presented his side, followed by more questions, whereupon
the elders turned around to present their backs as they
huddled to discuss the matter, which could take a long time.
One or more might turn with further questions. But all finally

turned back around toward the front, one motioning the
person or persons being heard to stand again, and the
senior elder then spoke their decision, after which the next
name was drumtalked.
Even for new men like Kunta, most of these hearings
were routine matters. People with babies recently born
asked for a bigger farm plot for the husband and an
additional rice plot for the wife—requests that were almost
always quickly granted, as were the first farming-land
requests of unmarried men like Kunta and his mates.
During man-training, the kintango had directed them never
to miss any Council of Elders sessions unless they had to,
as the witnessing of its decisions would broaden a man’s
knowledge as his own rains increased until he too would be
a senior elder. Attending his first session, Kunta had
looked at Omoro seated ahead of him, wondering how
many hundreds of decisions his father must have in his
head, though he wasn’t even a senior elder yet.
At his first session, Kunta witnessed a land matter
involving a dispute. Two men both claimed the fruit of some
trees originally planted by the first man on land to which the
second man now had the farming rights, since the first
man’s family had decreased. The Council of Elders
awarded the fruit to the first man, saying, “If he hadn’t
planted the trees, that fruit wouldn’t be there.”
At later sessions, Kunta saw people frequently charged
with breaking or losing something borrowed from an irate
lender who claimed that the articles had been both valuable
and brand-new. Unless the borrower had witnesses to
disprove that, he was usually ordered to pay for or replace
the article at the value of a new one. Kunta also saw furious
people accusing others of inflicting bad fortune on them
through evil magic. One man testified that another had
touched him with a cock’s spur, making him violently ill. A
young wife declared that her new mother-in-law had hidden
some bourein shrub in the wife’s kitchen, causing whatever
was cooked there to turn out badly. And a widow claimed
that an old man whose advances she had spurned had
sprinkled powdered eggshells in her path, making her walk

into a long succession of troubles, which she proceeded to
describe. If presented with enough impressive evidence of
evil magic’s motives and results, the Council would
command immediate corrective magic to be done by the
nearest traveling magic man, whom a drumtalk message
would summon to Juffure at the expense of the evildoer.
Kunta saw debtors ordered to pay up, even if they had to
sell their possessions, or with nothing to sell, to work off the
amount as the lender’s slave. He saw slaves charging their
masters with cruelty, or with providing unsuitable food or
lodgings, or with taking more than their half share of what
the slaves’ work had produced. Masters, in turn, accused
slaves of cheating by hiding some of their produce, or of
insufficient work, or of deliberately breaking farm tools.
Kunta saw the Council weigh carefully the evidence in these
cases, along with each person’s past record in the village,
and it was not uncommon for some slaves’ reputations to
be better than their masters’!
But sometimes there was no dispute between a master
and his slave. Indeed, Kunta saw them coming together
asking permission for the slave to marry into the master’s
family. But any couple intending to marry, first had to obtain
the Council’s permission. Couples judged by the Council to
be too close of kinship were refused out of hand, but for
those not thus disqualified, there was a waiting period of
one moon between the request and the reply, during which
the villagers were expected to pay quiet visits to any senior
elder and reveal any private information, either good or
bad, about the couple in question. Since childhood, had
each of them always demonstrated a good home training?
Had either of them ever caused undue trouble to anyone,
including their own families? Had either of them ever
displayed any undesirable tendencies of any kind, such as
cheating or telling less than the full truth? Was the girl
known for being irritable and argumentative? Was the man
known for beating goats unmercifully? If so, the marriage
was refused, for it was believed that such a person might
pass these traits along to his or her children. But as Kunta
knew even before he began attending the Council

sessions, most couples won approval for marriage,
because both sets of parents involved had already learned
the answers to these questions, and found them
satisfactory, before granting their own permission.
At the Council sessions, however, Kunta learned that
sometimes parents hadn’t been told things that people did
tell the senior elders. Kunta saw one marriage permission
flatly refused when a witness came forth to testify that the
young man of the planned marriage, as a young goatherd,
had once stolen a basket from him, thinking he hadn’t been
seen. The crime hadn’t been reported then, out of
compassion for the fact that he was still a boy; if it had
been reported, the law would have dictated that his right
hand be cut off. Kunta sat riveted as the young thief,
exposed at last, burst into tears, blurting out his guilt before
his horrified parents and the girl he was asking to many,
who began screaming. Soon afterward, he disappeared
from Juffure and was never seen or heard of again.
After attending Council sessions for a number of moons,
Kunta guessed that most problems for the senior elders
came from married people—especially from men with two,
three, or four wives. Adultery was the most frequent charge
by such men, and unpleasant things happened to an
offending man if a husband’s accusation was backed up
with convincing outside testimony or other strong evidence.
If a wronged husband was poor and the offending man well
off, the Council might order the offender to deliver his
possessions to the husband, one at a time, until the
husband said “I have enough,” which might not be until the
adulterer had only his bare hut left. But with both men poor,
which was usually the case, the Council might order the
offender to work as the husband’s slave for a period of time
considered worth the wrongful use of his wife. And Kunta
flinched for one repeated offender when the elders set a
date and time for him to receive a public flogging of thirtynine lashes across his bare back by his most recently
wronged husband, according to the ancient Moslem rule of
“forty, save one.”
Kunta’s own thoughts about getting married cooled

somewhat as he watched and listened to the angry
testimony of injured wives and husbands before the
Council. Men charged that their wives failed to respect
them, were unduly lazy, were unwilling to make love when
their turn came, or were just generally impossible to live
with. Unless an accused wife presented a strong
counterargument, with some witnesses to bear her out, the
senior elders usually told the husband to go that day and
set any three possessions of his wife’s outside her hut and
then utter toward those possessions, three times, with
witnesses present, the words, “I divorce you!”
A wife’s most serious charge—certain to bring out every
woman in the village if it was suspected in advance—was
to claim that her husband was not a man, meaning that he
was inadequate with her in bed. The elders would appoint
three old persons, one from the family of the defiant wife,
another from the family of the husband, and the third from
among the elders themselves. A date and time would be
set for them to observe the wife and husband together in
his bed. If two of the three voted that the wife was right, she
won her divorce, and her family kept the dowry goats; but if
two observers voted that the husband performed well, he
not only got the goats back but also could beat the wife and
divorce her if he wished to.
In the rains since Kunta had returned from manhood
training, no case that had been considered by the Council
filled him and his mates with as much anticipation as the
one that began with gossip and whispering about two older
members of their own kafo and a pair of Juffre’s most
eligible widows. On the day the matter finally came before
the Council, nearly everyone in the village gathered early to
assure themselves of the best possible seats. A number of
routine old people’s problems were settled first, and then
came the case of Dembo Dabo and Kadi Tamba, who had
been granted a divorce more than a rain before but now
were back before the Council grinning widely and holding
hands and asking permission to remarry. They stopped
grinning when the senior elder told them sternly: “You
insisted on divorce, therefore you may not remarry—until

each of you has had another wife and husband in between.”
The gasps from those in the rear were hushed by the
drumtalk announcement of the next names to be called:
“Tuda Tamba and Kalilu Conteh! Fanta Bedeng and Sefo
Kela!” The two members of Kunta’s kafo and the two
widows stood up. The taller widow, Fanta Bedeng, spoke
for all of them, sounding as if she had carefully practiced
what to say; but nervousness still gripped her. “Tuda Tamba
with her thirty-two rains and I with my thirty-three have small
chance of catching more husbands,” she said, and
proceeded to ask the Council to approve of teriya
friendships for her and Tuda Tamba to cook for and sleep
with Sefo Kela and Kalilu Conteh, respectively.
Different elders asked a few questions of all four—the
widows responding confidently, Kunta’s friends uncertainly,
in sharp contrast to their usual boldness of manner. And
then the elders turned around, murmuring among
themselves. The audience was so tense and quiet that a
dropped groundnut could have been heard as the elders
finally turned back around. The senior elder spoke: “Allah
would approve! You widows will have a man to use, and
you new men will get valuable experience for when you
marry later.”
The senior elder rapped his stick twice hard against the
edge of the talking drum and glared at the buzzing women
in the rear. Only when they fell silent was the next name
called: “Jankeh Jallon!” Having but fifteen rains, she was
thus the last to be heard. All of Juffure had danced and
feasted when she found her way home after escaping from
some toubob who had kidnaped her. Then, a few moons
later, she became big with child, although unmarried, which
caused much gossip. Young and strong, she might still
have found some old man’s acceptance as a third or fourth
junior wife. But then the child was born: He was a strange
pale tan color like a cured hide, and had very odd hair—
and wherever Jankeh Jallon would appear thereafter,
people would look at the ground and hurry elsewhere. Her
eyes glistening with tears, she stood up now and asked the
Council: What was she to do? The elders didn’t turn around

to confer; the senior elder said they would have to weigh
the matter—which was a most serious and difficult one—
until the next moon’s Council meeting. And with that, he and
the five other elders rose and left.
Troubled, and somehow unsatisfied, by the way the
session had ended, Kunta remained seated for a few
moments after most of his mates and the rest of the
audenice had gotten up—chattering among themselves—
and headed back toward their huts. His head was still full of
thoughts when Binta brought his evening meal, and he said
not a word to her as he ate, nor she to him. Later, as he
picked up his spear and his bow and arrow and ran with his
wuolo dog to his sentry post—for this was his night to stand
guard outside the village—Kunta was still thinking: about
the tan baby with the strange hair, about his no doubt even
stranger father, and about whether this toubob would have
eaten Jankeh Jallon if she had not escaped from him.

CHAPTER 32
In the moonlit expanse of ripening fields of groundnuts,
Kunta climbed the notched pole and sat down crosslegged
on the lookout platform that was built into its sturdy fork,
high above the ground. Placing his weapons beside him—
along with the ax with which he planned the next morning, at
last, to chop the wood for his drum frame—he watched as
his wuolo dog went trotting and sniffing this way and that in
the fields below. During Kunta’s first few moons on sentry
duty, rains ago, he remembered snatching at his spear if so
much as a rat went rustling through the grass. Every
shadow seemed a monkey, every monkey a panther, and
every panther a toubob, until his eyes and ears became
seasoned to his task. In time, he found he could tell the
difference between the snarl of a lion and that of a leopard.
It took longer, however, for him to learn how to remain
vigilant through these long nights. When his thoughts began
to turn inward, as they always did, he often forgot where he
was and what he was supposed to be doing. But finally he
learned to keep alert with half of his mind and yet still
explore his private thoughts with the other.
Tonight, he was thinking about the teriya friendships that
had been approved for his two friends by the Council of
Elders. For several moons, they had been telling Kunta and
his mates that they were going to take their case before the
Council, but no one had really believed them. And now it
was done. Perhaps at this very moment, he thought, they
might be performing the teriya act in bed with their two
widows. Kunta suddenly sat upright trying to picture what it
must be like.
It was chiefly from his kafo’s gossip that Kunta knew what
little he did about under women’s clothes. In marriage
negotiations, he knew, girls’ fathers had to guarantee them
as virgins to get the best bride price. And a lot of
bloodiness was connected with women, he knew that.
Every moon they had blood; and whenever they had

babies; and the night when they got married. Everyone
knew how the next morning, the newlyweds’ two mothers
went to the hut to put into a woven basket the white pagne
cloth the couple had slept on, taking its bloodiness as proof
of the girl’s virginity to the alimamo, who only then walked
around the village drumtalking Allah’s blessings on that
marriage. If that white cloth wasn’t bloodied, Kunta knew,
the new husband would angrily leave the hut with the two
mothers as his witnesses and shout loudly, “I divorce you!”
three times for all to hear.
But teriya involved none of that—only new men sleeping
with a willing widow and eating her cooking. Kunta thought
for a little while about how Jinna M’Baki had looked at him,
making no secret of her designs, amid the previous day’s
jostling crowd as the Council session ended. Almost
without realizing, he squeezed his hard foto, but he forced
back the strong urge to stroke it because that would seem
as if he was giving in to what that widow wanted, which was
embarrassing even to think about. He didn’t really want the
stickiness with her, he told himself; but now that he was a
man, he had every right, if he pleased, to think about teriya,
which the senior elders themselves had shown was nothing
for a man to be ashamed of.
Kunta’s mind returned to the memory of some girls he
and Lamin had passed in one village when returning from
their gold-hunting trip. There had been about ten of them,
he guessed, all beautifully black, in tight dresses, colorful
beads, and bracelets, with high breasts and little hair plaits
sticking up. They had acted so strangely as he went by that
it had taken Kunta a moment to realize that the show they
made of looking away whenever he looked at them meant
not that they weren’t interested in him but that they wanted
him to be interested in them.
Females were so confusing, he thought. Girls of their age
in Juffure never paid enough attention to him even to look
away. Was it because they knew what he was really like?
Or was it because they knew he was far younger than he
looked—too young to be worthy of their interest? Probably
the girls in that village believed no traveling man leading a

boy could have less than twenty or twenty-five rains, let
alone his seventeen. They would have scoffed if they had
known. Yet he was being sought after by a widow who knew
very well how young he was. Perhaps he was lucky not to
be older, Kunta thought. If he was, the girls of Juffure would
be carrying on over him the way the girls of that village had,
and he knew they all had just one thing on their minds:
marriage. At least Jinna M’Baki was too old to be looking
for anything more than a teriya friendship. Why would a man
want to marry when he could get a woman to cook for him
and sleep with him without getting married? There must be
some reason. Perhaps it was because it was only through
marrying that a man could have sons. That was a good
thing. But what would he have to teach those sons until he
had lived long enough to learn something about the world—
not just from his father, and from the arafang, and from the
kintango, but also by exploring it for himself, as his uncles
had done?
His uncles weren’t married even yet, though they were
older than his father, and most men of their rains had
already taken second wives by now. Was Omoro
considering taking a second wife? Kunta was so startled at
the thought that he sat up straight. And how would his
mother feel about it? Well, at least Binta, as the senior wife,
would be able to tell the second wife her duties, and make
certain she worked hard and set her sleeping turns with
Omoro. Would there be trouble between the two women?
No, he was sure Binta wouldn’t be like the kintango’s senior
wife, whom it was commonly known shouted so much
abuse at his junior wives, keeping them in such a turmoil,
that he rarely got any peace.
Kunta shifted the position of his legs to let them hang for
a while over the edge of his small perch, to keep the
muscles from cramping. His wuolo dog was curled on the
ground below him, its smooth brown fur shining in the
moonlight, but he knew that the dog only seemed to be
dozing, and that his nose and ears were alertly twitching for
the night air’s slightest smell or sound of warning to bound
up racing and barking after the baboons that had lately

been raiding the groundnut fields almost every night. During
each long lookout duty, few things pleased Kunta more than
when, maybe a dozen times in the course of a night, he
would be jerked from his thoughts by sudden distant
snarlings as a baboon was sprung upon in the brush by a
big cat—especially if the baboon’s growling turned into a
scream quickly hushed, which meant that it had not
escaped.
But it all was quiet now as Kunta sat on the edge of his
platform and looked out across the fields. The only sign of
life, in fact, beyond the tall grass, was the bobbing yellow
light of a Fulani herdsman in the distance as he waved his
grass torch to frighten away some animal, probably a
hyena, that was roaming too close to his cows. So good
were the Fulani attending cattle that people claimed they
could actually talk with their animals. And Omoro had told
Kunta that each day, as part of their pay for herding, the
Fulani would siphon a little blood from the cows’ necks,
which they mixed with milk and drank. What a strange
people, thought Kunta. Yet though they were not Mandinka,
they were from The Gambia, like him. How much stranger
must be the people—and the customs—one would find
beyond the borders of his land.
Within a moon after he returned from gold hunting with
Lamin, Kunta had been restless to get on the road once
again—this time for a real trip. Other young men of his
kafo, he knew, were planning to travel somewhere as soon
as the groundnuts and couscous got harvested, but none
was going to venture far. Kunta, however, meant to put his
eyes and feet upon that distant place called Mali, where,
some three or four hundred rains before, according to
Omoro and his uncles, the Kinte clan had begun. These
forefather Kintes, he remembered, had won fame as
blacksmiths, men who had conquered fire to make iron
weapons that won wars and iron tools that made farming
less hard. And from this original Kinte family, all of their
descendants and all of the people who worked for them
had taken the Kinte name. And some of that clan had
moved to Mauretania, the birthplace of Kunta’s holy-man

grandfather.
So that no one else, even Omoro, would know about his
plan until he wanted it known, Kunta had consulted in the
strictest confidence with the arafang about the best route to
Mali. Drawing a rough map in the dust, then tracing his
finger along it, he had told Kunta that by following the banks
of the Kamby Bolongo about six days in the direction of
one’s prayers to Allah, a traveler would reach Samo Island.
Beyond there, the river narrowed and curved sharply to the
left and began a serpent’s twists and turns, with many
confusing bolongs leading off as wide as the river, whose
swampy banks couldn’t be seen in some areas for the
thickness of the mangroves growing sometimes as high as
ten men. Where one could see the riverbanks, the
schoolmaster told him, they abounded with monkeys,
hippopotamus, giant crocodiles, and herds of as many as
five hundred baboons.
But two to three days of that difficult traveling should bring
Kunta to a second large island, where the low, muddy
banks would rise into small cliffs matted with shrubs and
small trees. The trail, which twisted alongside the river,
would take him past villages of Bansang, Karantaba, and
Diabugu. Soon afterward he would cross the eastern
border of The Gambia and enter the Kingdom of Fulladu,
and half day’s walking from there, he would arrive at the
village of Fatoto. Out of his bag, Kunta took the scrap of
cured hide the arafang had given him. On it was the name
of a colleague in Fatoto who he said would give Kunta
directions for the next twelve to fourteen days, which would
take him across a land called Senegal. Beyond that, said
the arafang, lay Mali and Kunta’s destination, Ka-ba, that
land’s main place. To go there and return, the arafang
figured, would take about a moon—not counting whatever
time Kunta chose to spend in Mali.
So many times had Kunta drawn and studied the route
on his hut’s dirt floor—erasing it before Binta brought his
meals—that he could almost see it before him as he sat on
his perch in the groundnut fields. Thinking about the
adventures that awaited him along that trail—and in Mali—

he could hardly contain his eagerness to be off. He was
almost as eager to tell Lamin of his plans, not only because
he wanted to share his secret, but also because he had
decided to take his little brother along. He knew how much
Lamin had boasted about that earlier trip with his brother.
Since then, Lamin had also been through manhood training
and would be a more experienced and trustworthy traveling
companion. But Kunta’s deepest reason for deciding to
take him, he had to admit, was simply that he wanted
company.
For a moment, Kunta sat in the dark smiling to himself,
thinking of Lamin’s face when the time would come for him
to know. Kunta planned, of course, to drop the news in a
very offhand way, as if he had just happened to think of it.
But before then he must speak about it with Omoro, whom
he knew now would feel no undue concern. In fact, he was
sure that Omoro would be deeply pleased, and that even
Binta, though she would worry, would be less upset than
before. Kunta wondered what he might bring to Binta from
Mali that she would treasure even more than her quills of
gold. Perhaps some fine molded pots, or a bolt of beautiful
cloth; Omoro and his uncles had said that the ancient Kinte
women in Mali had been famed for the pots they made and
for the brilliant patterns of cloth they wove, so maybe the
Kinte women there still did those things.
When he returned from Mali, it occurred to Kunta, he
might plan still another trip for a later rain. He might even
journey to that distant place beyond endless sands where
his uncles had told of the long caravans of strange animals
with water stored in two humps on their backs. Kalilu
Conteh and Sefo Kela could have their old, ugly teriya
widows, he, Kunta Kinte, would make a pilgrimage to
Mecca itself. Happening at that moment to be staring in the
direction of that holy city, Kunta became aware of a tiny,
steady yellow light far across the fields. The Fulani
herdsman over there, he realized, was cooking his
breakfast. Kunta hadn’t even noticed the first faint streaks
of dawn in the east.
Reaching down to pick up his weapons and head home,

he saw his ax and remembered the wood for his drum
frame. But he was tired, he thought, maybe he’d chop the
wood tomorrow. No, he was already halfway to the forest,
and if he didn’t do it now, he knew he would probably let it
go until his next sentry duty, which was twelve days later.
Besides, it wouldn’t be manly to give in to his weariness.
Moving his legs to test for any cramps and feeling none, he
climbed down the notched pole to the ground, where his
wuolo dog waited, making happy little barks and wagging
his tail. After kneeling for his suba prayer, Kunta got up,
stretched, took a deep breath of the cool morning air, and
set off toward the bolong at a lope.

CHAPTER 33
The familiar perfumes of wild flowers filled Kunta’s nostrils
as he ran, wetting his legs, through grass glistening with
dew in the first rays of sunshine. Hawks circled overhead
looking for prey, and the ditches beside the fields were
alive with the croaking of frogs. He veered away from a tree
to avoid disturbing a flock of blackbirds that filled its
branches like shiny black leaves. But he might have saved
himself the trouble, for no sooner had he passed by than an
angry, raucous cawing made him turn his head in time to
see hundreds of crows bullying the blackbirds from their
roost.
Breathing deeply as he ran, but still not out of breath, he
began to smell the musky aroma of the mangroves as he
neared the low, thick underbrush that extended far back
from the banks of the bolong. At the first sight of him, a
sudden snorting spread among the wild pigs, which in turn
set off a barking and snarling among the baboons, whose
big males quickly pushed their females and babies behind
them. When he was younger, he would have stopped to
imitate them, grunting and jumping up and down, since this
never failed to annoy the baboons, who would always
shake their fists and sometimes throw rocks. But he was no
longer a boy, and he had learned to treat all of Allah’s
creatures as he himself wished to be treated: with respect.
Fluttering white waves of egrets, cranes, storks, and
pelicans rose from their sleeping places as he picked his
way through the tangled mangrove down to the bolong.
Kunta’s wuolo dog raced ahead chasing watersnakes and
big brown turtles down their mud-slides into the water,
where they left not even a ripple.
As he always did whenever he felt some need to come
here after a night’s lookout duty, Kunta stood awhile at the
edge of the bolong, today watching a gray heron trailing its
long, thin legs as it flew at about a spear’s height above the
pale green water, rippling the surface with each downbeat

of its wings. Though the heron was looking for smaller
game, he knew that this was the best spot along the bolong
for kujalo, a big, powerful fish that Kunta loved to catch for
Binta, who would stew it for him with onions, rice, and bitter
tomatoes. With his stomach already rumbling for breakfast,
it made him hungry just to think of it.
A little farther downstream, Kunta turned away from the
water’s edge along a path he himself had made to an
ancient mangrove tree that he thought must know him, after
countless visits, as well as he knew it. Pulling himself up
into the lowest branch, he climbed all the way to his favorite
perch near the top. From here, in the clear morning, with the
sun warm on his back, he could see all the way to the next
bend in the bolong, still carpeted with sleeping water-fowl,
and beyond them to the women’s rice plots, dotted with
their bamboo shelters for nursing babies. In which one of
them, he wondered, had his mother put him when he was
little? This place in the early morning would always fill Kunta
with a greater sense of calm, and wonder, than anywhere
else he knew of. Even more than in the village mosque, he
felt here how totally were everyone and everything in the
hands of Allah, and how everything he could see and hear
and smell from the top of this tree had been here for longer
than men’s memories, and would be here long after he and
his sons and his sons’ sons had joined their ancestors.
Trotting away from the bolong toward the sun for a little
while, Kunta finally reached the head-high grass
surrounding the grove where he was going to pick out and
chop a section of tree trunk just the right size for the body of
his drum. If the green wood started drying and curing today,
he figured it would be ready to hollow out and work on in a
moon and a half, about the time he and Lamin would be
returning from their trip to Mali. As he stepped into the
grove, Kunta saw a sudden movement out of the corner of
his eye. It was a hare, and the wuolo dog was after it in a
flash as it raced for cover in the tall grass. He was obviously
chasing it for sport rather than for food, since he was
barking furiously; Kunta knew that a hunting wuolo never
made noise if he was really hungry. The two of them were

soon out of earshot, but Kunta knew that his dog would
come back when he lost interest in the chase.
Kunta headed forward to the center of the grove, where
he would find more trees from which to choose a trunk of
the size, smoothness, and roundness that he wanted. The
soft, mossy earth felt good under his feet as he walked
deeper into the dark grove, but the air here was damp and
cold, he noticed, the sun not being high enough or hot
enough yet to penetrate the thick foliage overhead. Leaning
his weapons and ax against a warped tree, he wandered
here and there, occasionally stooping, his eyes and fingers
examining for just the right trunk, one just a little bit larger—
to allow for drying shrinkage—than he wanted his drum to
be.
He was bending over a likely prospect when he heard the
sharp crack of a twig, followed quickly by the squawk of a
parrot overhead. It was probably the dog returning, he
thought in the back of his mind. But no grown dog ever
cracked a twig, he flashed, whirling in the same instant. In a
blur, rushing at him, he saw a white face, a club upraised,
heard heavy footfalls behind him. Toubob! His foot lashed
up and caught the man in the belly—it was soft and he
heard a grunt—just as something hard and heavy grazed
the back of Kunta’s head and landed like a treetrunk on his
shoulder. Sagging under the pain, Kunta spun—turning his
back on the man who lay doubled over on the ground at his
feet—and pounded with his fists on the faces of two black
men who were lunging at him with a big sack, and at
another toubob swinging a short, thick club, which missed
him this time as he sprang aside.
His brain screaming for any weapon, Kunta leaped into
them—clawing, butting, kneeing, gouging—hardly feeling
the club that was pounding against his back. As three of
them went down with him, sinking to the ground under their
combined weight, a knee smashed into Kunta’s lower
back, rocking him with such pain that he gasped. His open
mouth meeting flesh, his teeth clamped, cut, tore. His numb
fingers finding a face, he clawed deeply into an eye,
hearing its owner howl as again the heavy club met Kunta’s

head.
Dazed, he heard a dog’s snarling, a toubob screaming,
then a sudden piteous yelp. Scrambling to his feet, wildly
twisting, dodging, ducking to escape more clubbing, with
blood streaming from his split head, he saw one black
cupping his eye, one of the toubob holding a bloody arm,
standing over the body of the dog, and the remaining pair
circling him with raised clubs. Screaming his rage, Kunta
went for the second toubob, his fists meeting and breaking
the force of the descending club. Almost choking with the
awful toubob stink, he tried desperately to wrench away the
club. Why had he not heard them, sensed them, smelled
them?
Just then the black’s club smashed into Kunta once
again, staggering him to his knees, and the toubob sprang
loose. His head ready to explode, his body reeling, raging
at his own weakness, Kunta reared up and roared, flailing
blindly at the air, everything blurred with tears and blood
and sweat. He was fighting for more than his life now.
Omoro! Binta! Lamin! Suwadu! Madi! The toubob’s heavy
club crashed against his temple. And all went black.

CHAPTER 34
Kunta wondered if he had gone mad. Naked, chained,
shackled, he awoke on his back between two other men in
a pitch darkness full of steamy heat and sickening stink and
a nightmarish bedlam of shrieking, weeping, praying, and
vomiting. He could feel and smell his own vomit on his
chest and belly. His whole body was one spasm of pain
from the beatings he had received in the four days since his
capture. But the place where the hot iron had been put
between his shoulders hurt the worst.
A rat’s thick, furry body brushed his cheek, its whiskered
nose sniffing at his mouth. Quivering with revulsion, Kunta
snapped his teeth together desperately, and the rat ran
away. In rage, Kunta snatched and kicked against the
shackles that bound his wrists and ankles. Instantly, angry
exclamations and jerking came back from whomever he
was shackled to. The shock and pain adding to his fury,
Kunta lunged upward, his head bumping hard against wood
—right on the spot where he had been clubbed by the
toubob back in the woods. Gasping and snarling, he and
the unseen man next to him battered their iron cuffs at each
other until both slumped back in exhaustion. Kunta felt
himself starting to vomit again, and he tried to force it back,
but couldn’t. His already emptied belly squeezed up a thin,
sour fluid that drained from the side of his mouth as he lay
wishing that he might die.
He told himself that he mustn’t lose control again if he
wanted to save his strength and his sanity. After a while,
when he felt he could move again, he very slowly and
carefully explored his shackled right wrist and ankle with his
left hand. They were bleeding. He pulled lightly on the chain;
it seemed to be connected to the left ankle and wrist of the
man he had fought with. On Kunta’s left, chained to him by
the ankles, lay some other man, someone who kept up a
steady moaning, and they were all so close that their
shoulders, arms, and legs touched if any of them moved

even a little.
Remembering the wood he had bumped into with his
head, Kunta drew himself upward again, just enough for it
to bump gently; there wasn’t enough space even to sit up.
And behind his head was a wooden wall. I’m trapped like a
leopard in a snare, he thought. Then he remembered sitting
in the darkness of the manhood-training hut after being
taken blindfolded to the jujuo so many rains before, and a
sob welled up in his throat, but he fought it back. Kunta
made himself think about the cries and groans he was
hearing all around him. There must be many men here in
the blackness, some close, some farther away, some
beside him, others in front of him, but all in one room, if
that’s what this was. Straining his ears, he could hear still
more cries, but they were muffled and came from below,
beneath the splintery planking he lay on.
Listening more intently, he began to recognize the
different tongues of those around him. Over and over, in
Arabic, a Fulani was shouting, “Allah in heaven, help me!”
And a man of the Serere tribe was hoarsely wailing what
must have been the names of his family. But mostly Kunta
heard Mandinkas, the loudest of them babbling wildly in the
sira kango secret talk of men, vowing terrible deaths to all
toubob. The cries of the others were so slurred with
weeping that Kunta could identify neither their words nor
their languages, although he knew that some of the strange
talk he heard must come from beyond The Gambia.
As Kunta lay listening, he slowly began to realize that he
was trying to push from his mind the impulse to relieve the
demands of his bowels, which he had been forcing back for
days. But he could hold it in no longer, and finally the feces
curled out between his buttocks. Revolted at himself,
smelling his own addition to the stench, Kunta began
sobbing, and again his belly spasmed, producing this time
only a little spittle, but he kept gagging. What sins was he
being punished for in such a manner as this? He pleaded
to Allah for an answer. It was sin enough that he hadn’t
prayed once since the morning he went for the wood to
make his drum. Though he couldn’t get onto his knees, and

he knew not even which way was east, he closed his eyes
where he lay and prayed, beseeching Allah’s forgiveness.
Afterward, Kunta lay for a long time bathing dully in his
pains, and slowly became aware that one of them, in his
knotted stomach, was nothing more than hunger. It occurred
to him that he hadn’t eaten anything since the night before
his capture. He was trying to remember if he had slept in all
that time, when suddenly he saw himself walking along a
trail in the forest; behind him walked two blacks, ahead of
him a pair of toubob with their strange clothes and their
long hair in strange colors. Kunta jerked his eyes open and
shook his head; he was soaked in sweat and his heart was
pounding. He had been asleep without knowing. It had
been a nightmare; or was the nightmare this stinking
blackness? No, it was as real as the scene in the forest in
his dream had been. Against his will, it all came back to
him.
After fighting the black slatees and the toubob so
desperately in the grove of trees, he remembered
awakening—into a wave of blinding pain—and finding
himself gagged, blindfolded, and bound with his wrists
behind him and his ankles hobbled with knotted rope.
Thrashing to break free, he was jabbed savagely with sharp
sticks until blood ran down his legs. Yanked onto his feet
and prodded with the sticks to begin moving, he stumbled
ahead of them as fast as his hobbles would permit.
Somewhere along the banks of the bolong—Kunta could
tell by the sounds, and the feel of the soft ground beneath
his feet—he was shoved down into a canoe. Still
blindfolded, he heard the slatees grunting, rowing swiftly,
with the toubob hitting him whenever he struggled. Landing,
again they walked, until finally that night they reached a
place where they threw Kunta on the ground, tied him with
his back to a bamboo fence and, without warning, pulled off
his blindfold. It was dark, but he could see the pale face of
the toubob standing over him, and the silhouettes of others
like him on the ground nearby. The toubob held out some
meat for him to bite off a piece. He turned his head aside
and clamped his jaws. Hissing with rage, the toubob

grabbed him by the throat and tried to force his mouth
open. When Kunta kept it shut tight, the toubob drew back
his fist and punched him hard in the face.
Kunta was let alone the rest of the night. At dawn, he
began to make out—tied to other bamboo trunks—the
figures of the other captured people, eleven of them—six
men, three girls, and two children—all guarded closely by
armed slatees and toubob. The girls were naked; Kunta
could only avert his eyes; he never had seen a woman
naked before. The men, also naked, sat with murderous
hatred etched in their faces, grimly silent and crusted with
blood from whip cuts. But the girls were crying out, one
about dead loved ones in a burned village, another, bitterly
weeping, rocked back and forth cooing endearments to an
imaginary infant in her cradled arms, and the third shrieked
at intervals that she was going to Allah.
In wild fury, Kunta lunged back and forth trying to break
his bonds. A heavy blow with a club again knocked him
senseless. When he came to, he found that he too was
naked, that all of their heads had been shaved and their
bodies smeared with red palm oil. At around noonday, two
new toubob entered the grove. The slatees, now all grins,
quickly untied the captives from the bamboo trunks,
shouting to them to stand in a line. Kunta’s muscles were
knotted with rage and fear. One of the new toubob was
short and stout and his hair was white. The other towered
over him, tall and huge and scowling, with deep knife scars
across his face, but it was the white-haired one before
whom the slatees and the other toubob grinned and all but
bowed.
Looking at them all, the white-haired one gestured for
Kunta to step forward, and lurching backward in terror,
Kunta screamed as a whip seared across his back. A
slatee from behind grappled him downward to his knees,
jerking his head backward. The white-haired toubob calmly
spread Kunta’s trembling lips and studied his teeth. Kunta
attempted to spring up, but after another blow of the whip,
he stood as ordered, his body quivering as the toubob’s
fingers explored his eyes, his chest, his belly. When the

fingers grasped his foto, he lunged aside with a choked cry.
Two slatees and more lashings were needed to force
Kunta to bend over almost double, and in horror he felt his
buttocks being spread wide apart. Then the white-haired
toubob roughly shoved Kunta aside and, one by one, he
similarly inspected the others, even the private parts of the
wailing girls. Then whips and shouted commands sent the
captives all dashing, around within the enclosure, and next
springing up and down on their hauches.
After observing them, the white-haired toubob and the
huge one with the knife-scarred face stepped a little
distance away and spoke briefly in low tones. Stepping
back, the white-haired one, beckoning another toubob,
jabbed his finger at four men, one of them Kunta, and two of
the girls. The toubob looked shocked, pointing at the others
in a beseeching manner. But the white-haired one shook
his head firmly. Kunta sat straining against his bonds, his
head threatening to burst with rage, as the toubob argued
heatedly. After a while, the white-haired one disgustedly
wrote something on a piece of paper that the other toubob
angrily accepted.
Kunta struggled and howled with fury as the slatees
grabbed him again, wrestling him to a seated position with
his back arched. Eyes wide with terror, he watched as a
toubob withdrew from the fire a long, thin iron that the whitehaired one had brought with him. Kunta was already
thrashing and screaming as the iron exploded pain
between his shoulders. The bamboo grove echoed with the
screams of the others, one by one. Then red palm oil was
rubbed over the peculiar LL shape Kunta saw on their
backs.
Within the hour, they were hobbling in a line of clanking
chains, with the slatees’ ready whips flailing down on
anyone who balked or stumbled. Kunta’s back and
shoulders were ribboned with bleeding cuts when late that
night they reached two canoes hidden under thick,
overhanging mangroves at the river’s banks. Split into two
groups, they were rowed through darkness by the slatees,
with the toubob lashing out at any sign of struggle.

When Kunta saw a vast dark shape looming up ahead in
the night, he sensed that this was his last chance. Springing
and lunging amid shouts and screams around him, he
almost upset the canoe in his struggle to leap overboard;
but he was bound to the others and couldn’t make it over
the side. He almost didn’t feel the blows of the whips and
clubs against his ribs, his back, his face, his belly, his head
—as the canoe bumped against the side of the great dark
thing. Through the pain, he could feel the warm blood
pouring down his face, and he heard above him the
exclamations of many toubob. Then ropes were being
looped around him, and he was helpless to resist. After
being half pushed and half pulled up some strange rope
ladder, he had enough strength left to twist his body wildly in
another break for freedom; again he was lashed with
whips, and hands were grabbing him amid an
overwhelming toubob smell and the sound of women
shrieking and loud toubob cursing.
Through swollen lids, Kunta saw a thicket of legs and feet
all around him, and managing an upward glance while
trying to shield his bleeding face with his forearm, he saw
the short toubob with the white hair standing calmly making
marks in a small book with a stubby pencil. Then he felt
himself being snatched upright and shoved roughly across
a flat space. He caught a glimpse of tall poles with thick
wrappings of coarse white cloth. Then he was being
guided, stumbling weakly down some kind of narrow steps,
into a place of pitch blackness; at the same instant, his
nose was assaulted by an unbelievable stink, and his ears
by cries of anguish.
Kunta began vomiting as the toubob—holding dim
yellowish flames that burned within metal frames carried by
a ring—shackled his wrists and ankles, then shoved him
backward, close between two other moaning men. Even in
his terror, he sensed that lights bobbing in other directions
meant that the toubob were taking those who had come
with him to be shackled elsewhere. Then he felt his
thoughts slipping, he thought he must be dreaming. And
then, mercifully, he was.

CHAPTER 35
Only the rasping sound of the deck hatch being opened told
Kunta if it was day or night. Hearing the latch click, he would
jerk his head up—the only free movement that his chains
and shackles would allow—and four shadowy toubob
figures would descend, two of them with bobbing lights and
whips guarding the other pair as they all moved along the
narrow aisleways pushing a tub of food. They would thrust
tin pans of the stuff up onto the filth between each two
shacklemates. So far, each time the food had come, Kunta
had clamped his jaws shut, preferring to starve to death,
until the aching of his empty stomach had begun to make
his hunger almost as terrible as the pains from his
beatings. When those on Kunta’s level had been fed, the
lights showed the toubob descending farther below with the
rest of the food.
Less often than the feeding times, and usually when it
was night outside, the toubob would bring down into the
hold some new captives, screaming and whimpering in
terror as they were shoved and lashed along to wherever
they were to be chained into empty spaces along the rows
of hard plank shelves.
One day, shortly after a feeding time, Kunta’s ears
picked up a strange, muted sound that seemed to vibrate
through the ceiling over his head. Some of the other men
heard it too, and their moaning ended abruptly. Kunta lay
listening intently; it sounded as if many feet were dashing
about overhead. Then—much nearer to them in the
darkness—came a new sound, as of some very heavy
object being creaked very slowly upward.
Kunta’s naked back felt an odd vibration from the hard,
rough planking he lay on. He felt a tightening, a swelling
within his chest, and he lay frozenly. About him he heard
thudding sounds that he knew were men lunging upward,
straining against their chains. It felt as if all of his blood had
rushed into his pounding head. And then terror went

clawing into his vitals as he sensed in some way that this
place was moving, taking them away. Men started shouting
all around him, screaming to Allah and His spirits, banging
their heads against the planking, thrashing wildly against
their rattling shackles. “Allah, I will never pray to you less
than five times daily!” Kunta shrieked into the bedlam,
“Hear me! Help me!”
The anguished cries, weeping, and prayers continued,
subsiding only as one after another exhausted man went
limp and lay gasping for breath in the stinking blackness.
Kunta knew that he would never see Africa again. He could
feel clearly now, through his body against the planks, a
slow, rocking motion, sometimes enough that his shoulders
or arms or hips would press against the brief warmth of one
of the men he was chained between. He had shouted so
hard that he had no voice left, so his mind screamed it
instead: “Kill toubob—and their traitor black helpers!”
He was sobbing quietly when the hatch opened and the
four toubob came bumping down with their tub of food.
Again he clamped his jaws against his spasms of hunger,
but then he thought of something the kintango had once
said—that warriors and hunters must eat well to have
greater strength than other men. Starving himself meant
that weakness would prevent him from killing toubob. So
this time, when the pan was thrust onto the boards between
him and the man next to him, Kunta’s fingers also clawed
into the thick mush. It tasted like ground maize boiled with
palm oil. Each gulping swallow pained his throat in the spot
where he had been choked for not eating before, but he
swallowed until the pan was empty. He could feel the food
like a lump in his belly, and soon it was rising up his throat.
He couldn’t stop it, and a moment later the gruel was back
on the planking. He could hear, over the sound of his own
retching, that of others doing the same thing.
As the lights approached the end of the long shelf of
planks on which Kunta lay, suddenly he heard chains
rattling, a head bumping, and then a man screaming
hysterically in a curious mixture of Mandinka and what
sounded like some toubob words. An uproarious burst of

laughter came from the toubob with the feeding tub, then
their whips lashing down, until the man’s cries lapsed, into
babbling and whimpering. Could it be? Had he heard an
African speaking toubob? Was there a slatee down there
among them? Kunta had heard that toubob would often
betray their black traitor helpers and throw them into chains.
After the toubob had gone on down to the level below,
scarcely a sound was heard on Kunta’s level until they
reappeared with their emptied tub and climbed back up
outside, closing the hatch behind them. At that instant, an
angry buzzing began in different tongues, like bees
swarming. Then, down the shelf from where Kunta lay, there
was a heavy chain-rattling blow, a howl of pain and bitter
cursing in the same hysterical Mandinka. Kunta heard the
man shriek, “You think I am toubob?” There were more
violent, rapid blows and desperate screams. Then the
blows stopped, and in the blackness of the hold came a
high squealing—and then an awful gurgling sound, as of a
man whose breath was being choked off. Another rattling of
chains, a tattoo of bare heels kicking at the planks, then
quiet.
Kunta’s head was throbbing, and his heart was
pounding, as voices around him began screaming, “Slatee!
Slatees die!” Then Kunta was screaming along with them
and joining in a wild rattling of chains—when suddenly with
a rasping sound the hatch was opened, admitting its shaft
of daylight and a group of toubob with lights and whips.
They had obviously heard the commotion below them, and
though now almost total silence had fallen in the hold, the
toubob rushed among the aisles shouting and lashing, left
and right with their whips. When they left without finding the
dead man, the hold remained silent for a long moment.
Then, very quietly, Kunta heard a mirthless laugh from the
end of the shelf next to where the traitor lay dead.
The next feeding was a tense one. As if the toubob
sensed something amiss, their whips fell even more often
than usual. Kunta jerked and cried out as a bolt of pain cut
across his legs. He had learned that when anyone didn’t cry
out from a blow, he would get a severe beating until he did.

Then he clawed and gulped down the tasteless mush as his
eyes followed the lights moving on down along the shelf.
Every man in the hold was listening when one of the
toubob exclaimed something to the others. A jostling of
lights could be seen, then more exclamations and cursings,
and then one of the toubob rushed down the aisle and up
through the hatch, and he soon returned with two more.
Kunta could hear the iron cuffs and chains being unlocked.
Two of the toubob then half carried, half dragged the body
of the dead man along the aisle and up the hatch, while the
others continued bumping their food tub along the aisles.
The food team was on the level below when four more
toubob climbed down through the hatch and went directly to
where the slatee had been chained. By twisting his head,
Kunta could see the lights raised high. With violent cursing,
two of the toubob sent their whips whistling down against
flesh. Whoever was being beaten refused at first to scream;
though just listening to the force of the blows was almost
paralyzing to Kunta, he could hear the beaten man flailing
against his chains in the agony of his torture—and of his
grim determination not to cry out.
Then the toubob were almost shrieking their curses, and
the lights could be seen changing hands as one man
spelled the other with the lash. Finally the beaten man
began screaming—first a Foulah curse, then things that
could not be understood, though they too were in the Foulah
tongue. Kunta’s mind flashed a thought of quiet, gentle
Foulah tribe who tended Mandinka cattle—as the lashing
sounds continued until the beaten man barely whimpered.
Then the four toubob left, cursing, gasping, and gagging in
the stink.
The moans of the Foulah shivered through the black hold.
Then, after a while, a clear voice called out in Mandinka,
“Share his pain! We must be in this place as one village!”
The voice belonged to an elder. He was right. The Foulah’s
pains had been as Kunta’s own. He felt himself about to
burst with rage. He also felt, in some nameless way, a
terror greater than he had ever known before, and it
seemed to spread from the marrow of his bones. Part of

him wanted to die, to escape all of this; but no, he must live
to avenge it. He forced himself to lie absolutely still. It took a
long while, but finally he felt his strain and confusion, even
his body’s pains, begin to ebb—except for the place
between his shoulders where he had been burned with the
hot iron. He found that his mind could focus better now on
the only choice that seemed to lie before him and the
others: Either they would all die in this nightmare place, or
somehow the toubob would have to be overcome and
killed.

CHAPTER 36
The stinging bites, then the itching of the body lice, steadily
grew worse. In the filth, the lice as well as the fleas had
multiplied by the thousands until they swarmed all over the
hold. They were worst wherever the body crevices held any
hair. Kunta’s armpits, and around his foto, felt as if they
were on fire, and his free hand scratched steadily wherever
his shackled hand couldn’t reach.
He kept having thoughts of springing up and running
away; then, a moment later, his eyes would fill with tears of
frustration, anger would rise in him, and he would fight it all
back down until he felt again some kind of calm. The worst
thing was that he couldn’t move anywhere; he felt he
wanted to bite through his chains. He decided that he must
keep himself focused upon something, anything to occupy
his mind or his hands, or else he would go mad—as some
men in the hold seemed to have done already, judging from
the things they cried out.
By lying very still and listening to the breathing sounds of
the men on either side of him, Kunta had long since learned
to tell when either of them was asleep or awake. He
concentrated now upon hearing farther away from him. With
more and more practice at listening intently to repeated
sounds, he discovered that his ears after a while could
discern their location almost exactly; it was a peculiar
sensation, almost as if his ears were serving for eyes. Now
and then, among the groans and curses that filled the
darkness, he heard the thump of a man’s head against the
planks he lay on. And there was another odd and
monotonous noise. It would stop at intervals, then resume
after a while; it sounded as if two pieces of metal were
being rubbed hard together, and after hearing more of it
Kunta figured that someone was trying to wear the links of
his chains apart. Kunta often heard, too, brief exclamations
and janglings of chains as two men furiously fought, jerking
their shackles against each other’s ankles and wrists.

Kunta had lost track of time. The urine, vomit, and feces
that reeked everywhere around him had spread into a slick
paste covering the hard planking of the long shelves on
which they lay. Just when he had begun to think he couldn’t
stand it any more, eight toubob came down the hatchway,
cursing loudly. Instead of the routine food container, they
carried what seemed to be some kind of long-handled
hoes and four large tubs. And Kunta noticed with
astonishment that they were not wearing any clothes at all.
The naked toubob almost immediately began vomiting
worse than any of the others who had come before. In the
glow of their lights, they all but sprang along the aisles in
teams of two, swiftly thrusting their hoes up onto the shelves
and scraping some of the mess into their tubs. As each tub
was filled, the toubob would drag it back along the aisle
and go bumping it up the steps through the opened
hatchway to empty it outside, and then they would return.
The toubob were gagging horribly by now, their faces
contorted grotesquely, and their hairy, colorless bodies
covered with blobs of the mess they were scraping off the
shelves But when they finished their job and were gone,
there was no difference in the hot, awful, choking stench of
the hold.
The next time that more than the usual four toubob
descended with their food tubs, Kunta guessed that there
must be as many as twenty of them clumping down the
hatch steps. He lay frozen. Turning his head this way and
that, he could see small groups of toubob posting
themselves around the hold, some carrying whips and
guns, guarding others with lights upraised at the ends of
each shelf of chained men. A knot of fear grew in Kunta’s
belly as he began hearing strange clicking sounds, then
heavy rattlings. Then his shackled right ankle began jerking;
with flashing terror he realized that the toubob were
releasing him. Why? What terrible thing was going to
happen now? He lay still, his right ankle no longer feeling
the familiar weight of the chain, hearing all around the hold
more clicking sounds and the rattling of chains being
pulled. Then the toubob started shouting and lashing with

their whips. Kunta knew that it meant for them to get down
off their shelves. His cry of alarm joined a sudden bedlam
of shrieks in different tongues as the men reared their
bodies upward, heads thudding against the ceiling timbers.
The whips lashed down amid screams of pain as one
after another pair of men went thumping down into the
aisleways. Kunta and his Wolof shacklemate hugged each
other on the shelf as the searing blows jerked them
convulsively back and forth. Then hands clamped roughly
around their ankles and hauled them across the shelf’s
mushy filth and into the tangle of other men in the aisleway,
all of them howling under the toubob whips. Wrenching and
twisting in vain to escape the pain, he glimpsed shapes
moving against the light of the opened hatchway. The
toubob were snatching men onto their feet—one pair after
another—then beating and shoving them along, stumbling
in the darkness, toward the hatchway’s steps. Kunta’s legs
felt separated from the rest of his body as he went lurching
alongside the Wolof, shackled by their wrists, naked,
crusted with filth, begging not to be eaten.
The first open daylight in nearly fifteen days hit Kunta with
the force of a hammer between his eyes. He reeled under
the bursting pain, flinging his free hand up to cover his
eyes. His bare feet told him that whatever they were
walking on was moving slightly from side to side. Fumbling
blindly ahead, with even his cupped hand and clamped
eyelids admitting some tormenting light, trying futilely to
breathe through nostrils nearly plugged with snot, he gaped
open his cracked lips and took a deep breath of sea air—
the first of his life. His lungs convulsed from its rich
cleanness, and he crumpled to the deck, vomiting
alongside his shacklemate. All about him he heard more
vomiting, chains clanking, lashes meeting flesh, and
shrieks of pain amid toubob shouts and curses and strange
flapping sounds overhead.
When another whip ripped across his back, Kunta shrank
to one side, hearing his Wolof partner gasp as the lash hit
him. It kept tearing at them both until somehow they
stumbled to their feet. He slit his eyes to see if he could

escape some of the blows; but new pains stabbed into his
head as their tormentor shoved them toward where Kunta
could see the blurred forms of other toubob passing a
length of chain through the shackles around each man’s
ankles. There had been more of them down there in the
darkness than he had ever realized—and far more toubob
than had ever gone below. In the bright sunlight, they looked
even paler and more horrible, their faces pitted with the
holes of disease, their peculiar long hair in colors of yellow
or black or red, some of them even with hair around their
mouths and under their chins. Some were bony, others fat,
some had ugly scars from knives, or a hand, eye, or limb
missing, and the backs of many were crisscrossed with
deep scars. It flashed through Kunta’s mind how his teeth
had been counted and inspected, for several of these
toubob he saw had but few teeth.
Many of them were spaced along the rails, holding whips,
long knives, or some kind of heavy metal stick with a hole in
the end, and Kunta could see beyond them an amazing
sight—an unbelievable endlessness of rolling blue water.
He jerked his head upward toward the slapping sounds
above and saw that they came from giant white cloths
billowing among huge poles and many ropes. The cloths
seemed to be filled up with the wind. Turning about, Kunta
saw that a high barricade of bamboo taller than any man
extended completely across the width of the huge canoe.
Showing through the barricade’s center was the gaping
black mouth of a huge, terrible-looking metal thing with a
long, thick, hollow shaft, and the tips of more metal sticks
like the ones the toubob had been holding at the rail. Both
the huge thing and the sticks were pointed toward where he
and the other naked men were grouped.
As their ankle shackles were being linked onto the new
chain, Kunta got the chance to take a good look at his
Wolof shacklemate for the first time. Like himself, the man
was crusted from head to foot with filth. He seemed about
the rains of Kunta’s father Omoro, and the Wolof had that
tribe’s classic facial features, and he was very black of
color. The Wolof’s back was bleeding from where the

whippings had cut into him, and pus was oozing from where
an LL mark had been burned into his back. Kunta realized,
as their eyes searched each other, that the Wolof was
staring at him with the same astonishment. Amid the
commotion, they had time to stare also at the other naked
men, most of them gibbering in their terror. From the
different facial features, tribal tattoos, and scarification
marks, Kunta could tell that some were Foulah, Jola,
Serere, and Wolof, like his partner, but most were
Mandinkas—and there were some he could not be sure of.
With excitement, Kunta saw the one he was sure must have
killed the slatee. He was indeed a Foulah; blood from the
beating he had received was crusted all over him.
They were all soon being shoved and whipped toward
where another chain of ten men was being doused with
buckets of seawater drawn up from over the side. Then
other toubob with long-handled brushes were scrubbing the
screaming men. Kunta screamed, too, as the drenching
salt water hit him, stinging like fire in his own bleeding whip
cuts and the burned place on his back. He cried even
louder as the stiff brush bristles not only loosened and
scraped off some of his body’s crusted filth but also tore
open his scabbed lash cuts. He saw the water frothing and
pinkish at their feet. Then they were herded back toward
the center of the deck, where they flopped down in a
huddle. Kunta gawked upward to see toubob springing
about on the poles like monkeys, pulling at the many ropes
among the great white cloths. Even in Kunta’s shock, the
heat of the sun felt warm and good, and he felt an incredible
sense of relief that his skin was freed of some of its filth.
A sudden chorus of cries brought the chained men
jerking upright. About twenty women, most of them teenaged, and four children, came running naked and without
chains from behind the barricade, ahead of two grinning
toubob with whips. Kunta instantly recognized the girls who
had been brought on board with him—as with flooding rage
he watched all of the toubob leering at their nakedness,
some of them even rubbing their fotos. By sheer force of
will, he fought the urge to go lunging after the nearest

toubob despite their weapons. Hands clutched into fists, he
sucked hard for air to keep breathing, wrenching his eyes
away from the terrified women.
Then a toubob near the rail began pulling out and
pushing in between his hands some peculiar folding thing
that made a wheezing sound. Another joined in, beating on
a drum from Africa, as other toubob now moved
themselves into a ragged line with the naked men, women,
and children staring at them. The toubob in the line had a
length of rope, and each of them looped one ankle within it,
as if that rope was a length of chain such as linked the
naked men. Smiling now, they began jumping up and down
together in short hops, keeping in time with the drumbeats
and the wheezing thing. Then they and the other armed
toubob gestured for the men in chains to jump in the same
manner. But when the chained men continued to stand as if
petrified, the toubobs’ grins became scowls, and they
began laying about with whips.
“Jump!” shouted the oldest woman suddenly, in
Mandinka. She was of about the rains of Kunta’s mother
Binta. Bounding out, she began jumping herself. “Jump!”
she cried shrilly again, glaring at the girls and children, and
they jumped as she did. “Jump to kill toubob!” she shrieked,
her quick eyes flashing at the naked men, her arms and
hands darting in the movements of the warrior’s dance. And
then, as her meaning sank home, one after another
shackled pair of men began a weak, stumbling hopping up
and down, their chains clanking against the deck. With his
head down, Kunta saw the welter of hopping feet and legs,
feeling his own legs rubbery under him as his breath came
in gasps. Then the singing of the woman was joined by the
girls. It was a happy sound, but the words they sang told
how these horrible toubob had taken every woman into the
dark corners of the canoe each night and used them like
dogs. “Toubob fa!” (Kill toubob) they shrieked with smiles
and laughter. The naked, jumping men joined in: “Toubob
fa!” Even the toubob were grinning now, some of them
clapping their hands with pleasure.
But Kunta’s knees began to buckle beneath him and his

throat went tight when he saw, approaching him, the short,
stocky toubob with white hair, and with him the huge,
scowling one with the knife-scarred face who also had
been at that place where Kunta was examined and beaten
and choked and burned before he was brought here. In an
instant, as the other naked people saw these two, a sudden
silence fell, and the only sound to be heard was that of
great, slapping cloths overhead, for even the rest of the
toubob had stiffened at their presence.
Barking out something hoarsely, the huge one cleared
the other toubob away from the chained people. From his
belt there dangled a large ring of the slender, shiny things
that Kunta had glimpsed others using as they had opened
the chains. And then the white-haired one went moving
among the naked people, peering closely at their bodies.
Wherever he saw whip cuts badly festered, or pus draining
from rat bites or burned places, he smeared on some
grease from a can that the huge one handed to him. Or the
huge one himself would sprinkle a yellowish powder from a
container on wrists and ankles that became a sickly, moist,
grayish color beneath the iron cuffs. As the two toubob
moved nearer to him, Kunta shrank in fear and fury, but then
the white-haired one was smearing grease on his festering
places and the huge one was sprinkling his ankles and
wrists with the yellowish powder, neither of them seeming
even to recognize who Kunta was.
Then, suddenly, amid rising shouts among the toubob,
one of the girls who had been brought with Kunta was
springing wildly between frantic guards. As several of them
went clutching and diving for her, she hurled herself
screaming over the rail and went plunging downward. In the
great shouting commotion, the white-haired toubob and the
huge one snatched up whips and with bitter curses lashed
the backs of those who had gone sprawling after, letting her
slip from their grasp.
Then the toubob up among the cloths were yelling and
pointing toward the water. Turning in that direction, the
naked people saw the girl bobbing in the waves—and not
far away, a pair of dark fins coursing swiftly toward her.

Then came another scream—a blood-chilling one—then a
frothing and thrashing, and she was dragged from sight,
leaving behind only a redness in the water where she had
been. For the first time, no whips fell as the chained people,
sick with horror, were herded back into the dark hold and
rechained into their places. Kunta’s head was reeling. After
the fresh air of the ocean, the stench smelled even worse
than before, and after the daylight, the hold seemed even
darker. When soon a new disturbance arose, seeming
somewhat distant, his practiced ears told him that the
toubob were driving up onto the deck the terrified men from
the level below.
After a while, he heard near his right ear a low mutter.
“Jula?” Kunta’s heart leaped. He knew very little of the
Wolof tongue, but he did know that Wolof and some others
used the word jula to mean travelers and traders who were
usually Mandinkas. And twisting his head a bit closer to the
Wolof’s ear, Kunta whispered, “ Jula. Mandinka.” For
moments, as he lay tensely, the Wolof made no return
sound. It went flashing through Kunta’s head that if he could
only speak many languages, as his father’s brothers did—
but he was ashamed to have brought them to this place,
even in his thoughts.
“Wolof. Jebou Manga,” the other man whispered finally,
and Kunta knew that was his name.
“Kunta Kinte,” he whispered back.
Exchanging a whisper now and then in their desperation
to communicate, they picked at each other’s minds to learn
a new word here, another there, in their respective tongues.
It was much as they had learned their early words as firstkafo children. During one of the intervals of silence between
them, Kunta remembered how when he had been a lookout
against the baboons in the groundnut fields at night, the
distant fire of a Fulani herdsman had given him a sense of
comfort and he had wished that there had been some way
he could exchange words with this man he had never seen.
It was as if that wish were being realized now, except that it
was with a Wolof, unseen for the weeks they had been lying
there shackled to each other.

Every Wolof expression Kunta had ever heard he now
dragged from his memory. He knew that the Wolof was
doing the same with Mandinka words, of which he knew
more than Kunta knew of Wolof words. In another time of
silence between them, Kunta sensed that the man who lay
on his other side, who never had made any sound other
than moaning in pain, was listening closely to them. Kunta
realized from the low murmuring that spread gradually
throughout the hold that once the men had actually been
able to see each other up in the daylight, he and his own
shacklemate weren’t the only ones trying now to
communicate with one another. The murmuring kept
spreading. The hold would fall silent now only when the
toubob came with the food tub, or with the brushes to clean
the filth from the shelves. And there was a new quality to the
quietness that would fall at these times, for the first time
since they had been captured and thrown in chains, it was
as if there was among the men a sense of being together.

CHAPTER 37
The next time the men were taken up onto the deck, Kunta
made a point of looking at the man behind him in line, the
one who lay beside him to the left when they were below.
He was a Serere tribesman, much older than Kunta, and
his body front and back was creased with whip cuts, some
of them so deep and festering that Kunta felt badly for
having wished sometimes that he might strike the man in
the darkness for moaning so steadily in his pain. Staring
back at Kunta, the Serere’s dark eyes were full of fury and
defiance. A whip lashed out even as they stood looking at
each other—this time at Kunta, spurring him to move
ahead. The force of the blow drove him nearly to his knees
and triggered an explosion of rage. With his throat ripping
out almost an animal’s cry, Kunta lunged off balance toward
the toubob, only to fall, sprawling, dragging his shacklemate
down with him, as the toubob nimbly sprang clear of them
both. Men milled around them as the toubob, his eyes
narrowing with hatred, brought the whip down over and over
on both Kunta and the Wolof, like a slashing knife. Trying to
roll away, Kunta was kicked heavily in his ribs. But
somehow he and the gasping Wolof managed to stagger
back up among the other men from their shelf who were
shambling toward their dousing with buckets of seawater.
A moment later, the stinging saltiness of it was burning in
Kunta’s wounds, and his screams joined those of others
over the sound of the drum and the wheezing thing that had
again begun marking time for the chained men to jump and
dance for the toubob. Kunta and the Wolof were so weak
from their new beating that twice they stumbled, but whip
blows and kicks sent them hopping clumsily up and down in
their chains. So great was his fury that Kunta was barely
aware of the women singing “Toubob fa!” And when he had
finally been chained back down in his place in the dark
hold, his heart throbbed with a lust to murder toubob.
Every few days the eight naked toubob would again

come into the stinking darkness and scrape their tubs full of
the excrement that had accumulated on the shelves where
the chained men lay. Kunta would lie still with his eyes
staring balefully in hatred, following the bobbing orange
lights, listening to the toubob cursing and sometimes
slipping and falling into the slickness underfoot—so plentiful
now, because of the increasing looseness of the men’s
bowels, that the filth had begun to drop off the edges of the
shelves down into the aisleway.
The last time they were on deck, Kunta had noticed a
man limping on a badly infected leg. The chief toubob had
applied grease to it, but it hadn’t helped, and the man had
begun to scream horribly in the darkness of the hold. When
they next went on deck, he had to be helped up, and Kunta
saw that the leg, which had been grayish before, had begun
to rot and stink even in the fresh air. This time the man was
kept up on deck when the rest were taken back below. A
few days later, the women told the other prisoners in their
singing that the man’s leg had been cut off and that one of
the women had been brought to tend him, but that the man
had died that night and been thrown over the side. Starting
then, when the toubob came to clean the shelves, they also
dropped red-hot pieces of metal into pails of strong
vinegar. The clouds of acrid steam left the hold smelling
better, but soon it would again be overwhelmed by the
choking stink. It was a smell that Kunta felt would never
leave his lungs and skin.
The steady murmuring that went on in the hold whenever
the toubob were gone kept growing in volume and intensity
as the men began to communicate better and better with
one another. Words not understood were whispered from
mouth to ear along the shelves until someone who knew
more than one tongue would send back their meanings. In
the process, all of the men along each shelf learned new
words in tongues they had not spoken before. Sometimes
men jerked upward, bumping their heads, in the double
excitement of communicating with each other and the fact
that it was being done without the toubob’s knowledge.
Muttering among themselves for hours, the men developed

a deepening sense of intrigue and of brotherhood. Though
they were of different villages and tribes, the feeling grew
that they were not from different peoples or places.
When the toubob next came to drive them up onto the
deck, the chained men marched as if they were on parade.
And when they descended again, several of those men who
spoke several tongues managed to change their position in
line in order to get chained at the ends of shelves, thus
permitting more rapid relaying of translations. The toubob
never seemed to notice, for they were either unable or
unconcerned to distinguish one chained man from another.
Questions, and responses to them, had begun spreading
in the hold. “Where are we being taken?” That brought a
babble of bitterness. “Who ever returned to tell us?”
“Because they were eaten!” The question, “How long have
we been here?” brought a rash of guesses of up to a moon,
until the question was translated to a man who had been
able to keep a count of daylights through a small air vent
near where he was chained; he said that he counted
eighteen days since the great canoe had sailed.
Because of intrusions by toubob with their food tub or
their scrapers, an entire day might be used up in relaying of
responses to a single statement or question. Anxious
inquiries were passed along for men who might know each
other. “Is anyone here from Barrakunda village?” someone
asked one day, and after a time there came winging back
from mouth to ear the joyous response, “I, Jabon Sallah, am
here!” One day, Kunta nearly burst with excitement when
the Wolof hastily whispered, “Is anyone here from Juffure
village?” “Yes, Kunta Kinte!” he sent back breathlessly. He
lay almost afraid to breathe for the hour that it took an
answer to return: “Yes, that was the name. I heard the
drums of his grieving village.” Kunta dissolved into sobs,
his mind streaming with pictures of his family around a
flapping white cockerel that died on its back as the village
wadanela went to spread that sad news among all of the
people who would then come to Omoro, Binta, Lamin,
Suwadu, and the baby Madi, all of them squatting about
and weeping as the village drums beat out the words to

inform whoever might hear them far away that a son of the
village named Kunta Kinte now was considered gone
forever.
Days of talking sought answers to the question: “How
could the toubob of this canoe be attacked and killed?” Did
anyone have or know of anything that might be used as
weapons? None did. Up on the deck, had anyone noticed
any carelessness or weaknesses on the part of the toubob
that could be useful to a surprise attack? Again, none had.
The most useful information of any sort had come from the
women’s singing as the men danced in their chains: that
about thirty toubob were riding with them on this big canoe.
There had seemed to be many more, but the women were
in a better position to count them. The women said also that
there had been more toubob at the beginning of the
voyage, but five had died. They had been sewn inside white
cloths and thrown overboard while the white-haired chief
toubob read from some kind of book. The women also
sang that the toubob often fought and beat each other
viciously, usually as a result of arguments over which ones
would next use the women.
Thanks to their singing, not much happened up on the
deck that wasn’t quickly told to the men dancing in their
chains, who then lay discussing it down in the hold. Then
came the exciting new development that contact had been
established with the men who were chained on the level yet
below. Silence would fall in the hold where Kunta lay, and a
question would be called out from near the hatchway. “How
many are down there?” And after a time the answer would
circulate on Kunta’s level: “We believe about sixty of us.”
The relaying of any information from whatever source
seemed about the only function that would justify their
staying alive. When there was no news, the men would talk
of their families, their villages, their professions, their farms,
their hunts. And more and more frequently there arose
disagreements about how to kill the toubob, and when it
should be tried. Some of the men felt that, whatever the
consequences, the toubob should be attacked the next time
they were taken up on deck. Others felt that it would be

wiser to watch and wait for the best moment Bitter
disagreements began to flare up. One debate was
suddenly interrupted when the voice of an elder rang out,
“Hear me! Though we are of different tribes and tongues,
remember that we are the same people! We must be as
one village, together in this place!”
Murmurings of approval spread swiftly within the hold.
That voice had been heard before, giving counsel in times
of special stress. It was a voice with experience and
authority as well as wisdom. Soon the information passed
from mouth to ear that the speaker had been the alcala of
his village. After some time, he spoke again, saying now
that some leader must be found and agreed upon, and
some attack plan must be proposed and agreed upon
before there could be any hope of overcoming the toubob,
who were obviously both well organized and heavily armed.
Again, the hold soon filled with mutterings of approval.
The new and comforting sense of closeness with the
other men made Kunta feel almost less aware of the stink
and filth, and even the lice and rats. Then he heard the new
fear that was circulating—that yet another slatee was
believed to be somewhere on the level of men below. One
of the women had sung of having been among the group of
chained people whom this slatee had helped to bring,
blindfolded, onto this canoe. She had sung that it was night
when her blindfold was removed, but she had seen the
toubob give that slatee liquor, which he drank until he
stumbled about drunkenly, and then the toubob, all howling
with laughter, had knocked him unconscious and dragged
him into the hold. The woman sang that though she was not
able to tell in any definite way the face of that slatee, he was
almost surely somewhere below in chains like the rest, in
terror that he would be discovered and killed, as he now
knew that one slatee had already. In the hold, the men
discussed how probably this slatee, too, was able to speak
some toubob words, and in hopes of saving his miserable
life, he might try to warn the toubob of any attack plans he
learned of.
It occurred to Kunta, as he shook his shackles at a fat rat,

why he had known little of slatees until now. It was because
none of them would dare to live among people in villages,
where even a strong suspicion of who they were would
bring about their instant death. He remembered that back
in Juffure he often had felt that his own father Omoro and
yet older men, when they sat around the night fires, would
seem to be needlessly occupied with dark worries and
gloomy speculations about dangers to which he and the
other younger men privately thought they themselves would
never succumb. But now he understood why the older men
had worried about the safety of the village; they had known
better than he how many slatees slithered about many of
them in The Gambia. The despised tan-colored sasso
borro children of toubob fathers were easy to identify; but
not all. Kunta thought now about the girl of his village who
had been kidnaped by toubob and then escaped, who had
gone to the Council of Elders just before he had been taken
away, wanting to know what to do about her sasso borro
infant, and he wondered what the Council of Elders had
decided for her to do.
Some few slatees, he learned now, from the talk in the
hold, only supplied toubob canoes with such goods as
indigo, gold, and elephants’ teeth. But there were hundreds
of others who helped toubob to burn villages and capture
people. Some of the men told how children were enticed
with slices of sugar cane; then bags were thrown over their
heads. Others said the slatees had beaten them
mercilessly during the marches after their capture. One
man’s wife, big with child, had died on the road. The
wounded son of another was left bleeding to die from whip
cuts. The more Kunta heard, the more his rage became as
great for others as for himself.
He lay there in the darkness hearing the voice of his
father sternly warning him and Lamin never to wander off
anywhere alone; Kunta desperately wished that he had
heeded his father’s warnings. His heart sank with the
thought that he would never again be able to listen to his
father, that for the rest of whatever was going to be his life,
he was going to have to think for himself.

“All things are the will of Allah!” That statement—which
had begun with the alcala—went from mouth to ear, and
when it came to Kunta from the man lying on his left side,
he turned his head to whisper the words to his Wolof
shacklemate. After a moment, Kunta realized that the Wolof
hadn’t whispered the words on to the next man, and after
wondering for a while why not, he thought that perhaps he
hadn’t said them clearly, so he started to whisper the
message once again. But abruptly the Wolof spat out loudly
enough to be heard across the entire hold, “If your Allah
wills this, give me the devil!” From elsewhere in the
darkness came several loud exclamations of agreement
with the Wolof, and arguments broke out here and there.
Kunta was deeply shaken. The shocked realization that
he lay with a pagan burned into his brain, faith in Allah
being as precious to him as life itself. Until now he had
respected the friendship and the wise opinions of his older
shacklemate. But now Kunta knew that there could never be
any more companionship between them.

CHAPTER 38
Up on the deck now, the women sang of having managed
to steal and hide a few knives, and some other things that
could be used as weapons. Down in the hold, even more
strongly than before, the men separated into two camps of
opinion. The leader of the group that felt the toubob should
be attacked without delay was a fierce-looking, tattooed
Wolof. On the deck, every man had seen him dancing wildly
in his chains while baring his sharply filed teeth at the
toubob, who clapped for him because they thought he was
grinning. Those who believed in the wisdom of further
watchful preparation were led by the tawny Foulah who had
been beaten for choking the slatee to death.
There were a few followers of the Wolof who exclaimed
that the toubob should be attacked when many of them
were in the hold, where the chained men could see better
than they and the element of surprise would be greatest—
but those who urged this plan were dismissed as foolish by
the others, who pointed out that the bulk of the toubob
would still be up on the deck, and thus able to kill the
chained men below like so many rats. Sometimes when the
arguments between the Wolof and the Foulah would reach
the point of shouting, the alcala would intervene,
commanding them to be quieter lest their discussion be
overheard by the toubob.
Whichever leader’s thinking finally prevailed, Kunta was
ready to fight to the death. Dying held no fear for him any
more. Once he had decided that he would never see his
family and home again, he felt the same as dead already.
His only fear now was that he might die without at least one
of the toubob also dead by his hand. But the leader toward
whom Kunta was most inclined—along with most of the
men, he felt—was the cautious, whip-scarred Foulah. Kunta
had found out by now that most of the men in the hold were
Mandinkas, and every Mandinka knew well that the Foulah
people were known for spending years, even their entire

lives if need be, to avenge with death any serious wrong
ever done to them. If somone killed a Foulah and escaped,
the Foulah’s sons would never rest until one day they found
and killed the murderer.
“We must be as one behind the leader we agree upon,”
the alcala counseled. There was angry muttering from those
who followed the Wolof, but when it had become clear that
most of the men sided with the Foulah, he promptly issued
his first order. “We must examine toubob’s every action
with the eyes of hawks. And when the time comes, we must
be warriors.” He advised them to follow the counsel of the
woman who had told them to look happy when they jumped
on deck in their chains. That would relax the toubob’s
guard, which would make them easier to take by surprise.
And the Foulah also said that every man should locate with
his eyes any weaponlike object that he could swiftly grab
and use. Kunta was very pleased with himself, for during his
times up on deck, he had already spotted a spike, tied
loosely beneath a space of railing, which he intended to
snatch and use as a spear to plunge into the nearest
toubob belly. His fingers would clutch around the handle he
imagined in his hands every time he thought of it.
Whenever the toubob would jerk the hatch cover open
and climb down among them, shouting and wielding their
whips, Kunta lay as still as a forest animal. He thought of
what the kintango had said during manhood training, that
the hunter should learn from what Allah himself had taught
the animals—how to hide and watch the hunters who
sought to kill them. Kunta had lain for hours thinking how the
toubob seemed to enjoy causing pain. He remembered
with loathing the times when toubob would laugh as they
lashed the men—particularly those whose bodies were
covered with bad sores—and then disgustedly wipe off the
ooze that splattered onto them. Kunta lay also bitterly
picturing the toubob in his mind as they forced the women
into the canoe’s dark corners in the nights; he imagined
that he could hear the women screaming. Did the toubob
have no women of their own? Was that why they went like
dogs after others’ women? The toubob seemed to respect

nothing at all; they seemed to have no gods, not even any
spirits to worship.
The only thing that could take Kunta’s mind off the toubob
—and how to kill them—was the rats, which had become
bolder and bolder with each passing day. Their nose
whiskers would tickle between Kunta’s legs as they went to
bite a sore that was bleeding or running with pus. But the
lice preferred to bite him on the face, and they would suck
at the liquids in the corners of Kunta’s eyes, or the snot
draining from his nostrils. He would squirm his body, with
his fingers darting and pinching to crush any lice that he
might trap between his nails. But worse even than the lice
and rats was the pain in Kunta’s shoulders, elbows, and
hips, stinging now like fire from the weeks of steady
rubbing against the hard, rough boards beneath him. He
had seen the raw patches on other men when they were on
deck, and his own cries joined theirs whenever the big
canoe pitched or rolled somewhat more than usual.
And Kunta had seen that when they were up on the deck,
some of the men had begun to act as if they were zombies
—their faces wore a look that said that they were no longer
afraid, because they no longer cared whether they lived or
died. Even when the whips of the toubob lashed them, they
would react only slowly. When they had been scrubbed of
their filth, some were simply unable even to try jumping in
their chains, and the white-haired chief toubob, with a look
of worry, would order the others to permit those men to sit,
which they did with their foreheads between their knees
and the thin, pinkish fluid draining down their raw backs.
Then the chief toubob would force their heads backward
and into their upturned mouths pour some stuff that they
would usually choke up. And some of them fell limply on
their sides, unable to move, and toubob would carry them
back into the hold. Even before these men died, which
most of them did, Kunta knew that in some way they had
willed themselves to die.
But in obedience to the Foulah, Kunta and most of the
men tried to keep acting happy as they danced in their
chains, although the effort was like a canker in their souls. It

was possible to see, though, that when the toubob were
thus made more relaxed, fewer whips fell on backs, and the
men were allowed to remain on the sunlit deck for longer
periods than before. After enduring the buckets of seawater
and the torture of the scrubbing brushes, Kunta and the rest
of the men sat resting on their haunches and watched the
toubob’s every move—how they generally spaced
themselves along the rails, how they usually kept their
weapons too close to be grabbed away. No chained man’s
eye missed it whenever any toubob leaned his gun briefly
against the rails. While they sat on the deck, anticipating
the day when they would kill the toubob, Kunta worried
about the big metal thing that showed through the
barricade. He knew that at whatever cost in lives, that
weapon would have to be overwhelmed and taken, for even
though he didn’t know exactly what it was, he knew that it
was capable of some terrible act of destruction, which was
of course why the toubob had placed it there.
He worried also about those few toubob who were
always turning the wheel of the big canoe, a little this way, a
little that way, while staring at a round brownish metal thing
before them. Once, when they were down in the hold, the
alcala spoke his own thought: “If those toubob are killed,
who will run this canoe?” And the Foulah leader responded
that those toubob needed to be taken alive. “With spears at
their throats,” he said, “they will return us to our land, or they
will die.” The very thought that he might actually see his
land, his home, his family once again sent a shiver down
Kunta’s spine. But even if that should happen, he thought he
would have to live to be very old if he was ever to forget,
even a little bit, what the toubob had done to him.
There was yet another fear within Kunta—that the toubob
might have the eyes to notice how differently he and the
other men danced in their chains on the deck, for now they
were really dancing; they couldn’t help their movements
from showing what was deep in their minds: swift gestures
of hurling off shackles and chains, then clubbing, strangling,
spearing, killing. While they were dancing, Kunta and the
other men would even whoop out hoarsely their anticipation

of slaughter. But to his great relief, when the dancing ended
and he could again contain himself, he saw that the
unsuspecting toubob only grinned with happiness. Then,
one day up on the deck, the chained people suddenly stood
rooted in astonishment and stared—along with the toubob
—at a flight of hundreds of flying fish that filled the air above
the water like silvery birds. Kunta was watching,
dumfounded, when suddenly he heard a scream. Whirling,
he saw the fierce, tattooed Wolof in the act of snatching a
metal stick from a toubob. Swinging it like a club, he sent
the toubob’s brains spraying onto the deck, as other toubob
snapped from their frozen positions of shock, he battered
another to the deck. It was done so swiftly that the Wolof,
bellowing in rage, was clubbing his fifth toubob when the
flash of a long knife lopped off his head cleanly at the
shoulders. His head hit the deck before his body had
crumpled down, and both spurted blood from their stumps.
The eyes in the face were still open, and they looked very
surprised.
Amid shoutings of panic, more and more toubob
scrambled to the scene, rushing out of doors and sliding
like monkeys down from among the billowing white cloths.
As the women shrieked, the shackled men huddled
together in a circle. The metal sticks barked flame and
smoke, then the big black barrel exploded with a
thunderous roar and a gushing cloud of heat and smoke
just over their heads, and they screamed and sprawled
over each other in horror.
From behind the barricade bolted the chief toubob and
his scar-faced mate, both of them screaming in rage. The
huge one struck the nearest toubob a blow that sent blood
spurting from his mouth, then all of the other toubob were a
mass of screaming and shouting as with their lashes and
knives and firesticks they rushed to herd the shackled men
back toward the opened hatch. Kunta moved, not feeling
the lashes that struck him, still awaiting the Foulah’s signal
to attack. But almost before he realized it, they were below
and chained back in their dark places and the hatch cover
had been slammed down.

But they were not alone. In the commotion, a toubob had
been trapped down there with them. He dashed this way
and that in the darkness, stumbling and bumping into the
shelves, screaming in terror, scrambling up when he fell
and dashing off again. His howlings sounded like some
primeval beast’s. “Toubob fa!” somebody shouted, and
other voices joined him: “Toubob fa! Toubob fa!” They
shouted, louder and louder, as more and more men joined
the chorus. It was as if the toubob knew they meant it for
him, and pleading sounds came from him as Kunta lay
silent as if frozen, none of his muscles able to move. His
head was pounding, his body poured out sweat, he was
gasping to breathe. Suddenly the hatch cover was
snatched open and a dozen toubob came pounding down
the stairs into the dark hold. Some of their whips had
slashed down onto the trapped toubob before he could
make them realize he was one of them.
Then, under viciously lashing whips, the men were again
unchained and beaten, kicked back up onto the deck,
where they were made to watch as four toubob with heavy
whips beat and cut into a pulpy mess the headless body of
the Wolof. The chained men’s naked bodies shone with
sweat and blood from their cuts and sores, but scarcely a
sound came from among them. Every one of the toubob
was heavily armed now, and murderous rage was upon
their faces as they stood in a surrounding ring, glaring and
breathing heavily. Then the whips lashed down again as the
naked men were beaten back down into the hold and
rechained in their places.
For a long while, no one dared even to whisper. Among
the torrent of thoughts and emotions that assailed Kunta
when his terror had subsided enough for him to think at all
was the feeling that he wasn’t alone in admiring the
courage of the Wolof, who had died as a warrior was
supposed to. He remembered his own tingling anticipation
that the Foulah leader would at any instant signal an attack
—but that signal hadn’t come. Kunta was bitter, for
whatever might have happened would have been all over
now; and why not die now? What better time was going to

come? Was there any reason to keep hanging onto life
here in this stinking darkness? He wished desperately that
he could communicate as he once did with his
shacklemate, but the Wolof was a pagan.
Mutterings of anger at the Foulah’s failure to act were cut
short by his dramatic message: The attack, he announced,
would come the next time the men on their level of the hold
were on deck being washed and jumping in their chains,
when the toubob seemed most relaxed. “Many among us
will die,” the Foulah said, “as our brother has died for us—
but our brothers below will avenge us.”
There was grunting approval in the murmurings that
circulated now. And Kunta lay in the darkness listening to
the raspings of a stolen file rubbing against chains. He
knew for weeks that the file marks had been carefully
covered with filth so that the toubob wouldn’t see. He lay
fixing in his mind the faces of those who turned the great
wheel of the canoe, since their lives were the only ones to
be spared.
But during that long night in the hold, Kunta and the other
men began to hear an odd new sound they had never heard
before. It seemed to be coming through the deck from over
their heads. Silence fell rapidly in the hold and, listening
intently, Kunta guessed that stronger winds must be making
the great white cloths flap much harder than usual. Soon
there was another sound, as if rice was falling onto the
deck; he guessed after a while that it must be rain pelting
down. Then he was sure that he heard, unmistakably, the
muffled crack and rumble of heavy thunder.
Feet could be heard pounding on the deck overhead,
and the big canoe began to pitch and shudder. Kunta’s
screams were joined by others’ as each movement up and
down, or from side to side, sent the chained men’s naked
shoulders, elbows, and buttocks—already festered and
bleeding—grinding down even harder against the rough
boards beneath them, grating away still more of the soft,
infected skin until the muscles underneath began rubbing
against the boards. The hot, lancing pains that shot from
head to foot almost blacked him out, and it was as if from

afar that he became dimly aware of the sound of water
pouring down into the hold—and of shrieks amid a bedlam
of terror.
The water poured more and more rapidly into the hold
until Kunta heard the sound of something heavy, like some
great coarse cloth, being dragged over the deck above.
Moments later, the flood subsided to a trickle—but then
Kunta began to sweat and gag. The toubob had covered
the holes above them to shut out the water, but in so doing
they had cut off all air from the outside, trapping the heat
and stench entirely within the hold. It was beyond tolerance,
and the men began to choke and vomit, rattling their
shackles frantically and screaming in panic. Kunta’s nose,
throat, and then his lungs felt as if they were being stuffed
with blazing cotton. He was gasping for more breath to
scream with. Surrounded by the wild frenzy of jerking chains
and suffocating cries, he didn’t even know it when both his
bladder and his bowels released themselves.
Sledgehammer waves crashed on the hull, and the
timbers behind their heads strained against the pegs that
held them together. The choked screams of the men down
in the hold grew louder when the great canoe plunged
sickeningly downward, shuddering as tons of ocean poured
across her. Then, miraculously, she rose again under the
torrential rams that beat down on her like hailstones. As the
next mountainous broadside drove her back down again,
and up again—heeling, rolling, trembling—the noise in the
hold began to abate as more and more of the chained men
fainted and went limp.
When Kunta came to, he was up on deck, amazed to find
himself still alive. The orange lights, moving about, made
him think at first they were still below. Then he took a deep
breath and realized it was fresh air. He lay sprawled on his
back, which was exploding with pains so terrible that he
couldn’t stop crying, even in front of the toubob. He saw
them far overhead, ghostly in the moonlight, crawling along
the crossarms of the tall, thick poles; they seemed to be
trying to unroll the great white cloths. Then, turning his
pounding head toward a loud noise, Kunta saw still more

toubob stumbling up through the open hatchway, staggering
as they dragged the limp, shackled forms of naked men up
onto the deck of the canoe, dumping them down near Kunta
and others already piled up like so many logs.
Kunta’s shacklemate was trembling violently and
gagging between moans. And Kunta’s own gagging
wouldn’t stop as he watched the white-haired chief toubob
and the huge scarred one shouting and cursing at the
others, who were slipping and falling in the vomit underfoot,
some of it their own as they continued to drag up bodies
from below.
The great canoe was still pitching heavily, and drenching
spray now and then splashed over the quarterdeck. The
chief toubob had difficulty keeping his balance, now moving
hurriedly, as another toubob followed him with a light. One
or the other of them would turn upward the face of each
limp, naked man, and the light would be held close; the
chief toubob would peer closely and sometimes he would
put his fingers on one wrist of that shackled man.
Sometimes, then, cursing bitterly, he would bark an order
and the other toubob would lift and drop the man into the
ocean.
Kunta knew these men had died below. He asked
himself how Allah, of whom it was said that He was in all
places at all times, could possibly be here. Then he thought
that even to question such a thing would make him no
better than the pagan shuddering and moaning alongside
him. And he turned his thoughts to prayer for the souls of
the men who had been thrown over the side, joined already
with their ancestors. He envied them.

CHAPTER 39
By the time the dawn came, the weather had calmed and
cleared, but the ship still rolled in heavy swells. Some of the
men who still lay on their backs, or on their sides, showed
almost no signs of life, others were having dreadful
convulsions. But along with most of the other men, Kunta
had managed to get himself into a sitting position that
relieved somewhat the horrible pains in his back and
buttocks. He looked dully at the backs of those nearby; all
were bleeding afresh through blood already dried and
clotted, and he saw what seemed to be bones showing at
the shoulders and elbows. With a vacant look in another
direction, he could see a woman lying with her legs wide
apart, her private parts, turned in his direction, were
smudged with some strange grayish-yellowish paste, and
his nose picked up some indescribable smell that he knew
must come from her.
Now and then one of the men who were still lying down
would try to raise himself up. Some would only fall back, but
among those who succeeded in sitting up, Kunta noticed,
was the Foulah leader. He was bleeding heavily, and his
expression was of one who wasn’t part of what was going
on around him. Kunta didn’t recognize many of the other
men he saw. He guessed that they must be from the level
below his. These were the men whom the Foulah had said
would avenge the dead from the first level after the toubob
were attacked. The attack Kunta didn’t have the strength
even to think about it any more.
In some of the faces around him, including that of the
man he was shackled to, Kunta saw that death was etched.
Without knowing why, he was sure they were going to die.
The face of the Wolof was grayish in color, and each time
he gasped to breathe there was a bubbling sound in his
nose. Even the Wolof’s shoulder and elbow bones, which
showed through the raw flesh, had a grayish look. Almost
as if he knew that Kunta was looking at him, the Wolof’s

eyes fluttered open and looked back at Kunta—but without
a sign of recognition. He was a pagan, but . . . Kunta
extended a finger weakly to touch the Wolof on the arm. But
there was no sign of any awareness of Kunta’s gesture, or
of how much it had meant.
Although his pains didn’t subside, the warm sun began to
make Kunta feel a little better. He glanced down and saw,
in a pool around where he sat, the blood that had drained
from his back—and a shuddering whine forced itself up his
throat. Toubob who were also sick and weak were moving
about with brushes and buckets, scrubbing up vomit and
feces, and others were bringing tubs of filth up from below
and dumping it over the side. In the daylight, Kunta vacantly
noted their pale, hairy skins, and the smallness of their
fotos.
After a while he smelled the steam of boiling vinegar and
tar through the gratings as the chief toubob began to move
among the shackled people applying his salve. He would
put a plaster of cloth smeared with powder wherever the
bones showed through, but seeping blood soon made the
plasters slip and fall off. He also opened some of the men’s
mouths—including Kunta’s—and forced down their throats
something from a black bottle.
At sunset, those who were well enough were fed—maize
boiled with red palm oil and served in a small tub they
dipped into with their hands. Then each of them had a
scoopful of water brought by a toubob from a barrel that
was kept at the foot of the biggest of the poles on deck. By
the time the stars came out, they were back below in
chains. The emptied spaces on Kunta’s level, where men
had died, were filled with the sickest of the men from the
level below, and their moans of suffering were even louder
than before.
For three days Kunta lay among them in a twilight of pain,
vomiting, and fever, his cries mingled with theirs. He was
also among those racked with fits of deep, hoarse
coughing. His neck was hot and swollen, and his entire
body poured with sweat. He came out of his stupor only
once, when he felt the whiskers of a rat brush along his hip;

almost by reflex his free hand darted out and trapped the
rat’s head and foreparts in its grasp. He couldn’t believe it.
All the rage that had been bottled up in him for so long
flooded down his arm and into his hand. Tighter and tighter
he squeezed—the rat wriggling and squealing frantically—
until he could feel the eyes popping out, the skull crunching
under his thumb. Only then did the strength ebb from his
fingers and the hand open to release the crushed remains.
A day or two later, the chief toubob began to enter the
hold himself, discovering each time—and unchaining—at
least one more lifeless body. Gagging in the stench, with
others holding up lights for him to see by, he applied his
salve and powder and forced the neck of his black bottle
into the mouths of those still living. Kunta fought not to
scream with pain whenever the fingers touched the grease
to his back or the bottle to his lips. He also shrank from the
touch of those pale hands against his skin; he would rather
have felt the lash. And in the light’s orange glow, the faces
of the toubob had a kind of paleness without features that
he knew would never leave his mind any more than the stink
in which he lay.
Lying there in filth and fever, Kunta didn’t know if they had
been down in the belly of this canoe for two moons or six, or
even as long as a rain. The man who had been lying near
the vent through which they had counted the days was dead
now. And there was no longer any communication among
those who had survived.
Once when Kunta came jerking awake from a half sleep,
he felt a nameless terror and sensed that death was near
him. Then, after a while, he realized that he could no longer
hear the familiar wheezing of his shacklemate beside him.
It was a long time before Kunta could bring himself to reach
out a hand and touch the man’s arm. He recoiled in horror,
for it was cold and rigid. Kunta lay shuddering. Pagan or
not, he and the Wolof had talked together, they had lain
together. And now he was alone.
When the toubob came down again, bringing the boiled
corn, Kunta cringed as their gagging and muttering came
closer and closer. Then he felt one of them shaking the

body of the Wolof and cursing. Then Kunta heard food
being scraped as usual into his own pan, which was thrust
up between him and the still Wolof, and the toubob moved
on down the shelf. However starved his belly was, Kunta
couldn’t think of eating.
After a while two toubob came and unshackled the
Wolof’s ankle and wrist from Kunta’s. Numb with shock, he
listened as the body was dragged and bumped down the
aisle and up the stairs. He wanted to shove himself away
from that vacant space, but the instant he moved, the raking
of his exposed muscles against the boards made him
scream in agony. As he lay still, letting the pain subside, he
could hear in his mind the death wailings of the women of
the Wolof’s village, mourning his death. “Toubob fa!” he
screamed into the stinking darkness, his cuffed hand
jangling the chain of the Wolof’s empty cuff.
The next time he was up on deck, Kunta’s glance met the
gaze of one of the toubob who had beaten him and the
Wolof. For an instant they looked deeply into each other’s
eyes, and though the toubob’s face and eyes tightened with
hatred, this time no whip fell upon Kunta’s back. As Kunta
was recovering from his surprise, he looked across the
deck and for the first time since the storm, saw the women.
His heart sank. Of the original twenty, only twelve remained.
But he felt a pang of relief that all four of the children had
survived.
There was no scrubbing this time—the wounds on the
men’s backs were too bad—and they jumped in their
chains only weakly, this time to the beat of the drum alone;
the toubob who had squeezed the wheezing thing was
gone. As well as they could, in their pain, the women who
were left sang that quite a few more toubob had been sewn
into white cloths and dropped overboard.
With a great weariness in his face, the white-haired
toubob was moving among the naked people with his salve
and bottle when a man with the empty shackles of a dead
partner dangling from his wrist and ankle bolted from where
he stood and raced to the rail. He had scrambled halfway
over it when one of the nearby toubob managed to catch up

with him and grab the trailing chain just as he leaped. An
instant later his body was banging against the side of the
great canoe and the deck was ringing with his strangled
howls. Suddenly, unmistakably, amid the cries, Kunta heard
some toubob words. A hissing rose from the chained men;
it was the other slatee, without question. As the man flailed
against the hull—screeching “Toubob fa!” and then begging
for mercy—the chief toubob went over to the rail and looked
down. After listening for a moment, he abruptly jerked the
chain from the other toubob and let the slatee drop
screaming into the sea. Then, without a word, he went back
to greasing and powdering wounds as if nothing had
happened.
Though their whips fell less often, the guards seemed to
act terrified of their prisoners now. Each time the prisoners
were brought up on deck, the toubob ringed them closely,
with firesticks and knives drawn, as if at any moment the
shackled people might attack. But as far as Kunta was
concerned, though he despised the toubob with all his
being, he didn’t care about killing them any more. He was
so sick and weak that he didn’t even care if he lived or died
himself. Up on the deck he would simply lie down on his
side and close his eyes. Soon he would feel the chief
toubob’s hands smearing salve on his back again. And
then, for a while, he would feel nothing but the warmth of the
sun and smell only the fresh ocean breeze, and the pain
would dissolve into a quiet haze of waiting—almost
blissfully—to die and join his ancestors.
Occasionally, down in the hold, Kunta would hear a little
murmuring here and there, and he wondered what they
could find to talk about. And what was the point? His Wolof
shacklemate was gone, and death had taken some of
those who had translated for the others. Besides, it took too
much strength to talk any more. Each day Kunta felt a little
worse, and it didn’t help to see what was happening to
some of the other men. Their bowels had begun to drain out
a mixture of clotted blood and thick, grayish-yellow, horribly
foul-smelling mucus.
When they first smelled and saw the putrid discharge, the

toubob became agitated. One of them went rushing back
up through the hatch, and minutes later the chief toubob
descended. Gagging, he gestured sharply for the other
toubob to unshackle the screaming men and remove them
from the hold. More toubob soon returned with lights, hoes,
brushes, and buckets. Vomiting and gasping curses, they
scraped, scrubbed, and scrubbed again the shelves from
which sick men had been taken away. Then they poured
boiling vinegar on those places and moved the men lying
next to those places to other empty spaces farther away.
But nothing helped, for the bloody contagion—which
Kunta heard the toubob call “the flux”—spread and spread.
Soon he too began to writhe with pains in his head and
back, then to roast and shiver with fever and chills, and
finally to feel his insides clenching and squeezing out the
stinking blood and ooze. Feeling as if his entrails were
coming out along with the discharge, Kunta nearly fainted
from the pain. Between screams, he cried out things he
could hardly believe he was uttering: “Omoro—Omar the
Second Caliph, third after Muhammad the Prophet!
Kairaba—Kairaba means peace!” Finally his voice was all
but gone from shrieking and could hardly be heard amid the
sobbing of the others. Within two days, the flux had afflicted
nearly every man in the hold.
By now the bloody globs were dripping down off the
shelves into the aisleways, and there was no way for the
toubob to avoid brushing against it or stepping on it—
cursing and vomiting—whenever they went into the hold.
Each day now the men would be taken up on deck while the
toubob took down buckets of vinegar and tar to boil into
steam to clean the hold. Kunta and his mates stumbled up
through the hatch and across to where they would flop down
on the deck, which would soon be fouled with the blood
from their backs and the discharge from their bowels. The
smell of the fresh air would seem to go all through Kunta’s
body, from his feet to his head and then, when they were
returned to the hold, the vinegar and tar smell would do the
same, although the smell of it never killed the stench of the
flux.

In his delirium, Kunta saw flashing glimpses of his
Grandma Yaisa lying propped up on one arm on her bed
talking to him for the last time, when he was but a small boy;
and he thought of old Grandmother Nyo Boto, and the
stories she would tell when he was back in the first kafo,
about the crocodile who was caught in a trap by the river
when the boy came along to set it free. Moaning and
babbling, he would claw and kick when the toubob came
anywhere near him.
Soon most of the men could no longer walk at all, and
toubob had to help them up onto the deck so that the whitehaired one could apply his useless salve in the light of day.
Every day someone died and was thrown overboard,
including a few more of the women and two of the four
children—as well as several of the toubob themselves.
Many of the surviving toubob were hardly able to drag
themselves around any more, and one manned the big
canoe’s wheel while standing in a tub that would catch his
flux mess.
The nights and the days tumbled into one another until
one day Kunta and the few others from below who yet could
manage to drag themselves up the hatch steps stared over
the rail with dull astonishment at a rolling carpet of goldcolored seaweed floating on the surface of the water as far
as they could see. Kunta knew that the water couldn’t
continue forever, and now it seemed that the big canoe was
about to go over the edge of the world—but he didn’t really
care. Deep within himself, he sensed that he was nearing
the end; he was unsure only of by what means he was
going to die.
Dimly he noted that the great white sheets were
dropping, no longer full of wind as they had been. Up
among the poles, the toubob were pulling their maze of
ropes to move the sheets this way and that, trying to pick up
any little breeze. From the toubob down on the deck, they
drew up buckets of water and sloshed them against the
great cloths. But still the great canoe remained becalmed,
and gently it began to roll back and forth upon the swells.
All the toubob were on the edges of their tempers now,

the white-haired one even shouting at his knife-scarred
mate, who cursed and beat the lesser toubob more than
before, and they in turn fought with each other even more
than they had before. But there were no further beatings of
the shackled people, except on rare occasions, and they
began to spend almost all the daylight hours up on deck,
and—to Kunta’s amazement—they were given a full pint of
water every day.
When they were taken up from the hold one morning, the
men saw hundreds of flying fish piled up on the deck. The
women sang that the toubob had set lights out on deck the
night before to lure them, and they had flown aboard and
floundered about in vain trying to escape. That night they
were boiled with the maize, and the taste of fresh fish
startled Kunta with pleasure. He wolfed the food down,
bones and all.
When the stinging yellow powder was sprinkled next
against Kunta’s back, the chief toubob applied a thick cloth
bandage against his right shoulder. Kunta knew that meant
his bone had begun showing through, as was the case with
so many other men already, especially the thinner ones,
who had the least muscle over their bones. The bandaging
made Kunta’s shoulder hurt even more than before. But he
hadn’t been back down in the hold for long before the
seeping blood made the soaked bandage slip loose. It
didn’t matter. Sometimes his mind would dwell on the
horrors he had been through, or on his deep loathing of all
toubob; but mostly he just lay in the stinking darkness, eyes
gummy with some yellowish matter, hardly aware that he
was still alive.
He heard other men crying out, or beseeching Allah to
save them, but he neither knew nor cared who they were.
He would drift off into fitful, moaning sleep, with jumbled
dreams of working in the fields back in Juffure, of leafy
green farms, of fish leaping from the glassy surface of the
bolong, of fat antelope haunches roasting over glowing
coals, of gourds of steaming tea sweetened with honey.
Then, drifting again into wakefulness, he sometimes heard
himself mouthing bitter, incoherent threats and begging

aloud, against his will, for a last look at his family. Each of
them—Omoro, Binta, Lamin, Suwadu, Madi—was a stone
in his heart. It tortured him to think that he had caused them
grief. Finally he would wrench his mind away to something
else, but it wouldn’t help. His thoughts would always drift to
something like the drum he had been going to make for
himself. He’d think about how he would have practiced on it
at night while guarding the groundnut fields, where no one
could hear his mistakes. But then he would remember the
day he had gone to chop down the tree trunk for the drum,
and it would all come flooding back.
Among the men who were still alive, Kunta was one of
the last who were able to climb down unassisted from their
shelf and up the steps to the deck. But then his wasting legs
began trembling and buckling under him and finally he, too,
had to be half carried and half dragged to the deck.
Moaning quietly, with his head between his knees, rheumy
eyes clamped tight, he sat limply until his turn came to be
cleaned. The toubob now used a large soapy sponge lest a
hard-bristled brush do further damage to the men’s gouged
and bleeding backs. But Kunta was still better off than
most, who were able only to lie on their sides, seeming
almost as if they had stopped breathing.
Among them all, only the remaining women and children
were reasonably healthy; they hadn’t been shackled and
chained down within the darkness, filth, stench, lice, fleas,
rats, and contagion. The oldest of the surviving women, one
of about Binta’s rains—Mbuto was her name, a Mandinka
of the village of Kerewan—had such stateliness and dignity
that even in her nakedness it was as if she wore a robe.
The toubob didn’t even stop her from moving with
comforting words among the shackled men lying sick on
the deck, rubbing fevered chests and foreheads. “Mother!
Mother!” Kunta whispered when he felt her soothing hands,
and another man, too weak to speak, just gaped his jaws in
an attempt to smile.
Finally, Kunta could no longer even eat without help. The
draining shreds of muscle in his shoulders and elbows
refused to lift his hands enough for him to claw into the food

pan. Often now the feeding was done with the men up on
deck, and one day Kunta’s fingernails were scrabbling to
get up over the edges of the pan when the scar-faced
toubob noticed it. He barked an order at one of the lesser
toubob, who proceeded to force into Kunta’s mouth a
hollow tube and pour the gruel through it. Gagging on the
tube, Kunta gulped and slobbered the food down, then
sprawled out on his belly.
The days were growing hotter, and even up on the deck
everyone was sweltering in the still air. But after a few more
days, Kunta began to feel a breath of cooling breeze. The
big cloths up on the tall poles started to snap again and
soon were billowing in the wind. The toubob up above were
springing about like monkeys again, and soon the big
canoe was cutting through the water with froth curling at her
bow.
The next morning, more toubob than usual came
thudding down through the hatch, and much earlier than
ever before. With great excitement in their words and
movements, they rushed along the aisles, unchaining the
men and hurriedly helping them upward. Stumbling up
through the hatch behind a number who were ahead of him,
Kunta blinked in the early-morning light and then saw the
other toubob and the women and children standing at the
rails. The toubob were all laughing, cheering, and gesturing
wildly. Between the scabbed backs of the other men, Kunta
squinted and then saw . . .
Though still blurred in the distance, it was unmistakably
some piece of Allah’s earth. These toubob really did have
some place to put their feet upon—the land of toubabo doo
—which the ancient forefathers said stretched from the
sunrise to the sunset. Kunta’s whole body shook. The sweat
came popping out and glistened on his forehead. The
voyage was over. He had lived through it all. But his tears
soon flooded the shoreline into a gray, swimming mist, for
Kunta knew that whatever came next was going to be yet
worse.

CHAPTER 40
Back down in the darkness of the hold, the chained men
were too afraid to open their mouths. In the silence, Kunta
could hear the ship’s timbers creaking, the muted ssss of
the sea against the hull, and the dull clumpings of toubob
feet rushing about on the deck overhead.
Suddenly some Mandinka began shrieking the praises of
Allah, and soon all the others had joined his—until there
was a bedlam of praise and praying and of chains being
rattled with all the strength the men could muster. Amid the
noise, Kunta didn’t hear the hatch when it scraped open,
but the jarring shaft of daylight stilled his tongue and jerked
his head in that direction. Blinking his eyes to compress the
mucus in them, he watched dimly as the toubob entered
with their lanterns and began to herd them—with unusual
haste—back onto the deck. Wielding their long-handled
brushes once again, the toubob ignored the men’s
screams as they scrubbed the encrusted filth from their
festering bodies, and the chief toubob moved down the line
sprinkling his yellow powder. But this time, where the
muscles were rubbed through deeply, he signaled for his
big assistant to apply a black substance with a wide, flat
brush. When it touched Kunta’s raw buttocks, the rocketing
pain smashed him dizzily to the deck.
As he lay with his whole body feeling as if it were on fire,
he heard men howling anew in terror, and snapping his
head up, he saw several of the toubob engaged in what
could only be preparing the men to be eaten. Several of
them, in pairs, were pushing first one chained man and then
the next into a kneeling position where he was held while a
third toubob brushed onto his head a white frothing stuff
and then, with a narrow, gleaming thing, raked the hair off
his scalp, leaving blood trickling down across his face.
When they reached Kunta and seized him, he screamed
and struggled with all his might until a heavy kick in the ribs
left him gasping for breath while the skin of his head numbly

felt the frothing and the scraping. Next the chained men’s
bodies were oiled until they shone, and then they were
made to step into some odd loincloth that had two holes the
legs went through and that also covered their private parts.
Finally, under the close scrutiny of the chief toubob, they
were chained prostrate along the rails as the sun reached
the center of the sky.
Kunta lay numbly, in a kind of stupor. It came into his
mind that when they finally ate his flesh and sucked the
bones, his spirit would already have escaped to Allah. He
was praying silently when barking shouts from the chief
toubob and his big helper made him open his eyes in time
to watch the lesser toubob dashing up the tall poles. Only
this time their grunts, as they strained at the ropes, were
mixed with excited shouts and laughter. A moment later
most of the great white sheets slackened and crumpled
downward.
Kunta’s nostrils detected a new smell in the air; actually,
it was a mingling of many smells, most of them strange and
unknown to him. Then he thought he heard new sounds in
the distance, from across the water. Lying on the deck, with
his crusty eyes half shut, he couldn’t tell from where. But
soon the sounds grew closer, and as they did, his fearful
whimperings joined those of his mates. As the sounds got
louder and louder, so did their praying and gibbering—until
finally, in the light wind, Kunta could smell the bodies of
many unfamiliar toubob. Just then the big canoe bumped
hard against something solid and unyielding, and it lurched
heavily, rocking back and forth until, for the first time since
they left Africa four and a half moons before, it was secured
by ropes and fell still.
The chained men sat frozen with terror. Kunta’s arms
were locked around his knees, and his eyes were clamped
shut as if he were paralyzed. For as long as he could, he
held his breath against the sickening wave of smells, but
when something clumped heavily onto the deck, he slit his
eyes open and saw two new toubob stepping down from a
wide plank holding a white cloth over their noses. Moving
briskly, they shook hands with the chief toubob, who was

now all grins, clearly anxious to please them. Kunta silently
begged Allah’s forgiveness and mercy as the toubob
began rushing along the rails unchaining the black men and
gesturing with shouts for them to stand up. When Kunta and
his mates clutched at their chains—not wanting to let go of
what had become almost a part of their bodies—the whips
began to crack, first over their heads, then against their
backs. Instantly, amid screams, they let go of the chains
and stumbled to their feet.
Over the side of the big canoe, down on the dock, Kunta
could see dozens of toubob stamping, laughing, pointing in
their excitement, with dozens more running from all
directions to join them. Under the whips, they were driven in
a stumbling single file up over the side and down the
sloping plank toward the waiting mob. Kunta’s knees
almost buckled under him as his feet touched the toubob
earth, but other toubob with cocked whips kept them
moving closely alongside the jeering crowd, their massed
smell like the blow of a giant fist in Kunta’s face. When one
black man fell, crying out to Allah, his chains pulled down
the men ahead of and behind him. Whips lashed them all
back up again as the toubob crowd screamed in
excitement.
The impulse to dash and escape surged wildly in Kunta,
but the whips kept his chained line moving. They trudged
past toubob riding in extraordinary two-wheeled and fourwheeled vehicles drawn by huge animals that looked a little
like donkeys; then past a toubob throng milling around in
some kind of marketplace stacked with colorful piles of
what seemed to be fruits and vegetables. Finely clothed
toubob regarded them with expressions of loathing, while
more roughly clad toubob pointed and hooted with
enjoyment. One of the latter, he noticed, was a she toubob,
her stringy hair the color of straw. After seeing the hungry
way the toubob on the great canoe had lusted after black
women, he was amazed to see that the toubob had women
of their own; but looking at this specimen, he could
understand why they preferred Africans.
Kunta darted a glance sideways as they passed a group

of toubob screaming crazily around a flurry of two cocks
fighting with each other. And hardly had that din faded
behind them when they came upon a shouting crowd
leaping this way and that to avoid being bowled over by
three toubob boys as they raced and dove after a
squealing, filthy swine that looked shiny with grease. Kunta
couldn’t believe his eyes.
As if lightning had struck him, Kunta then glimpsed two
black men who were not from the big canoe—a Mandinka
and a Serere, there was no doubt. He jerked his head
around to stare as they walked quietly behind a toubob. He
and his mates weren’t alone after all in this terrible land!
And if these men had been allowed to live, perhaps they
too would be spared from the cooking cauldron. Kunta
wanted to rush over and embrace them; but he saw their
expressionless faces and the fear in their downcast eyes.
And then his nose picked their smell; there was something
wrong with it. His mind reeled; he couldn’t comprehend how
black men would docilely follow behind a toubob who
wasn’t watching them or even carrying a weapon, rather
than try to run away—or kill him.
He didn’t have time to think about it further, for suddenly
they found themselves at the open door of a large, square
house of baked mud bricks in oblong shapes with iron bars
set into a few open spaces along the sides. The chained
men were whipped inside the wide door by the toubob
guarding it, then into a large room. Kunta’s feet felt cool on
the floor of hard-packed earth. In the dim light that came
through the two iron-barred openings, his blinking eyes
picked out the forms of five black men huddled along one
wall. They didn’t so much as lift their heads as the toubob
locked the wrists and ankles of Kunta and his mates in thick
iron cuffs attached to short chains that were bolted to the
walls.
Along with the others, Kunta then huddled down himself,
with his chin against his clasped knees, his mind dazed
and reeling with all that he had seen and heard and smelled
since they had gotten off the great canoe. After a little while,
another black man entered. Without looking at anyone, he

put down some tins of water and food before each man and
quickly left. Kunta wasn’t hungry, but his throat was so dry
that finally he couldn’t stop himself from sipping a small
amount of the water; it tasted strange. Numbly, he watched
through one of the iron-barred spaces as the daylight faded
into darkness.
The longer they sat there, the deeper Kunta sank into a
kind of nameless terror. He felt that he would almost have
preferred the dark hold of the big canoe, for at least he had
come to know what to expect next there. He shrank away
whenever a toubob came into the room during the night;
their smell was strange and overpowering. But he was used
to the other smells—sweat, urine, dirty bodies, the stink as
some chained man went through the agony of relieving his
bowels amid the others’ mingled praying and cursing and
moaning and rattling of their chains.
Suddenly all the noises ceased when a toubob came in
carrying a light such as those that had been used on the big
canoe, and behind him, in the soft yellowish glow, another
toubob who was striking with his whip some new black one
who was crying out in what sounded like the toubob tongue.
That one was soon chained, and the two toubob left. Kunta
and his mates remained still, hearing the newcomer’s
piteous sounds of suffering and pain.
The dawn was near, Kunta sensed, when from
somewhere there came into his head as clearly as when he
had been in manhood training the high, sharp voice of the
kintango: “A man is wise to study and learn from the
animals.” It was so shocking that Kunta sat bolt upright.
Was it finally some message from Allah? What could be the
meaning of learning from the animals—here, now? He was
himself, if anything, like an animal in a trap. His mind
pictured animals he had seen in traps. But sometimes the
animals escaped before they were killed. Which ones were
they?
Finally, the answer came to him. The animals he had
known to escape from their traps were those that had not
gone raging around within the trap until they were
weakened to exhaustion; those that escaped had made

themselves wait quietly, conserving their strength until their
captors came, and the animal seized upon their
carelessness to explode its energies in a desperate attack
—or more wisely—a flight toward freedom.
Kunta felt intensely more alert. It was his first positive
hope since he had plotted with the others to kill the toubob
on the big canoe. His mind fastened upon it now: escape.
He must appear to the toubob to be defeated. He must not
rage or fight yet; he must seem to have given up any hope.
But even if he managed to escape, where would he run?
Where could he hide in this strange land? He knew the
country around Juffure as he knew his own hut, but here he
knew nothing whatever. He didn’t even know if toubob had
forests, or if they did, whether he would find in them the
signs that a hunter would use. Kunta told himself that these
problems would simply have to be met as they came.
As the first streaks of dawn filtered through the barred
windows, Kunta dropped fitfully off to sleep. But no sooner
had he closed his eyes, it seemed, than he was awakened
by the strange black one bringing containers of water and
food. Kunta’s stomach was clenched with hunger, but the
food smelled sickening, and he turned away. His tongue felt
foul and swollen. He tried to swallow the slime that was in
his mouth, and his throat hurt with the effort.
He looked dully about him at his mates from the big
canoe; they all seemed unseeing, unhearing—drawn within
themselves. Kunta turned his head to study the five who
were in the room when they arrived. They wore ragged
toubob clothing. Two of them were of the light brown sasso
borro skin color that the elders had said resulted from
some toubob taking a black woman. Then Kunta looked at
the newcomer who had been brought in during the night; he
sat slumped forward, with dried blood caked in his hair and
staining the toubob garment he wore, and one of his arms
hung in an awkward way that told Kunta it had been broken.
More time passed, and finally Kunta fell asleep again—
only to be awakened once more, this time much later, by
the arrival of another meal. It was some kind of steaming
gruel, and it smelled even worse than the last thing they’d

set in front of him. He shut his eyes not to see it, but when
nearly all of his mates snatched up the containers and
began wolfing the stuff down, he figured it might not be so
bad after all. If he was ever going to escape from this place,
thought Kunta, he would need strength. He would force
himself to eat a little bit—but just a little. Seizing the bowl,
he brought it to his open mouth and gulped and swallowed
until the gruel was gone. Disgusted with himself, he banged
the bowl back down and began to gag, but he forced it
down again. He had to keep the food inside him if he was
going to live.
From that day on, three times a day, Kunta forced himself
to eat the hated food. The black one who brought it came
once each day with a bucket, hoe, and a shovel to clean up
after them. And once each afternoon, two toubob came to
paint more of the stinging black liquid over the men’s worst
open sores, and sprinkled the yellow powder over the
smaller sores. Kunta despised himself for the weakness
that made him jerk and moan from the pain along with the
others.
Through the barred window, Kunta counted finally six
daylights and five nights. The first four nights, he had heard
faintly from somewhere, not far away, the screams of
women whom he recognized from the big canoe. He and
his mates had had to sit there, burning with humiliation at
being helpless to defend their women, let alone
themselves. But it was even worse tonight, for there were
no cries from the women. What new horror had been visited
upon them?
Nearly every day, one or more of the strange black men
in toubob clothes would be shoved stumbling into the room
and chained. Slumped against the wall behind them, or
curled down on the floor, they always showed signs of
recent beatings, seeming not to know where they were or to
care what might happen to them next. Then, usually before
another day had passed, some important-acting toubob
would enter the room holding a rag over his nose, and
always one of those recent prisoners would start shrieking
with terror—as that toubob kicked and shouted at him; then

that black one would be taken away.
Whenever he felt that each bellyful of food had settled,
Kunta would try to make his mind stop thinking in an effort
to sleep. Even a few minutes of rest would blot out for that
long a time this seemingly unending horror, which for
whatever reason was the divine will of Allah. When Kunta
couldn’t sleep, which was most of the time, he would try to
force his mind onto things other than his family or his
village, for when he thought of them he would soon be
sobbing.

CHAPTER 41
Just after the seventh morning gruel, two toubob entered
the barred room with an armload of clothes. One frightened
man after another was unchained and shown how to put
them on. One garment covered the waist and legs, a
second the upper body. When Kunta put them on, his sores
—which had begun to show signs of healing—immediately
started itching.
In a little while, he began to hear the sound of voices
outside; quickly it grew louder and louder. Many toubob
were gathering—talking, laughing—not far beyond the
barred window. Kunta and his mates sat in their toubob
clothes gripped with terror at what was about to happen—
whatever it might be.
When the two toubob returned, they quickly unchained
and marched from the room three of the five black ones
who had originally been there. All of them acted somehow
as if this had happened to them enough times before that it
no longer mattered. Then, within moments, there was a
change in the toubob sounds from outside; it grew much
quieter, and then one toubob began to shout. Struggling
vainly to understand what was being said, Kunta listened
uncomprehendingly to the strange cries: “Fit as a fiddle!
Plenty of spirit in this buck!” And at brief intervals other
toubob would interrupt with loud exclamations: “Three
hundred and fifty!” “Four hundred!” “Five!” And the first
toubob would shout: “Let’s hear six! Look at him! Works
like a mule!”
Kunta shuddered with fear, his face running with sweat,
breath tight in his throat. When four toubob came into the
room—the first two plus two others—Kunta felt paralyzed.
The new pair of toubob stood just within the doorway
holding short clubs in one hand and small metal objects in
the other. The other two moved along Kunta’s side of the
wall unlocking the iron cuffs. When anyone cried out or
scuffled, he was struck with a short, thick, leather strap.

Even so, when Kunta felt himself touched, he came up
snarling with rage and terror. A blow against his head
made it seem to explode; he felt only dimly a jerking at the
chain on his cuffs. When his head began to clear, he was
the first of a chained line of six men stumbling through a
wide doorway out into the daylight.
“Just picked out of the trees!” The shouting one was
standing on a low wooden platform with hundreds of other
toubobs massed before him. As they gaped and gestured,
Kunta’s nose recoiled from the thickness of their stink. He
glimpsed a few black ones among the toubob, but their
faces seemed to be seeing nothing. Two of them were
holding in chains two of the black ones who had just been
brought from the barred room. Now the shouting one began
striding rapidly down the line of Kunta and his companions,
his eyes appraising them from head to foot. Then he
walked back up the line, thrusting the butt of his whip
against their chests and bellies, all the while making his
strange cries: “Bright as monkeys! Can be trained for
anything!” Then back at the end of the line, he prodded
Kunta roughly toward the raised platform. But Kunta
couldn’t move, except to tremble; it was as if his senses
had deserted him. The whip’s butt seared across the
scabbing crust of his ulcerated buttocks; nearly collapsing
under the pain, Kunta stumbled forward, and the toubob
clicked the free end of his chain into an iron thing.
“Top prime—young and supple!” the toubob shouted.
Kunta was already so numb with terror that he hardly
noticed as the toubob crowd moved in more closely around
him. Then, with short sticks and whip butts, they were
pushing apart his compressed lips to expose his clenched
teeth, and with their bare hands prodding him all over—
under his armpits, on his back, his chest, his genitals. Then
some of those who had been inspecting Kunta began to
step back and make strange cries.
“Three hundred dollars! . . . three fifty!” The shouting
toubob laughed scornfully. “Five hundred! . . . six!” He
sounded angry. “This is a choice young nigger! Do I hear
seven fifty?”

“Seven fifty!” came a shout.
He repeated the cry several times, then shouted “Eight!”
until someone in the crowd shouted it back. And then,
before he had a chance to speak again, someone else
shouted, “Eight fifty!”
No other calls came. The shouting toubob unlocked
Kunta’s chain and jerked him toward a toubob who came
stepping forward. Kunta felt an impulse to make his move
right then, but he knew he would never make it—and
anyway, he couldn’t seem to move his legs.
He saw a black one moving forward behind the toubob to
whom the shouter had handed his chain. Kunta’s eyes
entreated this black one, who had distinctly Wolof features,
My Brother, you come from my country. . . . But the black
one seemed not even to see Kunta as, jerking hard on the
chain so that Kunta came stumbling after him, they began
moving through the crowd. Some of the younger toubob
laughed, jeered, and poked at Kunta with sticks as they
passed, but finally they left them behind and the black one
stopped at a large box sitting up off the ground on four
wheels behind one of those enormous donkeylike animals
he had seen on his way here from the big canoe.
With an angry sound, the black one grasped Kunta
around the hips and boosted him up over the side and onto
the floor of the box, where he crumpled into a heap, hearing
the free end of his chain click again into something beneath
a raised seat at the front end of the box behind the animal.
Two large sacks of what smelled like some kind of grain
were piled near where Kunta lay. His eyes were shut tight;
he felt as if he never wanted to see anything again—
especially this hated black slatee.
After what seemed a very long time, Kunta’s nose told
him that the toubob had returned. The toubob said
something, and then he and the black one climbed onto the
front seat, which squeaked under their weight. The black
one made a quick sound and flicked a leather thong across
the animal’s back; instantly it began pulling the rolling box
ahead.
Kunta was so dazed that for a while he didn’t even hear

the chain locked to his ankle cuff rattling against the floor of
the box. He had no idea how far they had traveled when his
next clear thought came, and he slit his eyes open far
enough to study the chain at close range. Yes, it was
smaller than the one that had bound him on the big canoe; if
he collected his strength and sprang, would this one tear
loose from the box?
Kunta raised his eyes carefully to see the backs of the
pair who sat ahead, the toubob sitting stiffly at one end of
the plank seat, the black one slouched at the other end.
They both sat staring ahead as if they were unaware that
they were sharing the same seat. Beneath it—somewhere
in shadow—the chain seemed to be securely fastened; he
decided that it was not yet time to jump.
The odor of the grain sacks alongside him was
overpowering, but he could also smell the toubob and his
black driver—and soon he smelled some other black
people, quite nearby. Without making a sound, Kunta
inched his aching body upward against the rough side of
the box, but he was afraid to lift his head over the side, and
didn’t see them.
As he lay back down, the toubob turned his head around,
and their eyes met. Kunta felt frozen and weak with fear, but
the toubob showed no expression and turned his back
again a moment later. Emboldened by the toubob’s
indifference, he sat up again—this time a little farther—
when he heard a singing sound in the distance gradually
growing louder. Not far ahead of them he saw a toubob
seated on the back of another animal like the one pulling
the rolling box. The toubob held a coiled whip, and a chain
from the animal was linked to the wrist cuffs of about twenty
blacks—or most of them were black, some brown—walking
in a line ahead of him.
Kunta blinked and squinted to see better. Except for two
fully clothed women, they were all men and all bare from the
waist up, and they were singing with deep mournfulness.
He listened very carefully to the words, but they made no
sense whatever to him. As the rolling box slowly passed
them, neither the blacks nor the toubob so much as glanced

in their direction, though they were close enough to touch.
Most of their backs, Kunta saw, were crisscrossed with
whip scars, some of them fresh, and he guessed at some
of their tribes: Foulah, Yoruba, Mauretanian, Wolof,
Mandinka. Of those he was more certain than of the others,
most of whom had had the misfortune to have toubob for
fathers.
Beyond the blacks, as far as Kunta’s runny eyes would let
him see, there stretched vast fields of crops growing in
different colors. Alongside the road was a field planted with
what he recognized as maize. Just as it was back in Juffure
after the harvest, the stalks were brown and stripped of
ears.
Soon afterward, the toubob leaned over, took some
bread and some kind of meat out of a sack beneath the
seat, broke off a piece of each, and set them on the seat
between him and the black one, who picked it up with a tip
of his hat and began to eat. After a few moments the black
one turned in his seat, took a long look at Kunta, who was
watching intently, and offered him a chunk of bread. He
could smell it from where he lay, and the fragrance made
his mouth water, but he turned his head away. The black
one shrugged and popped it into his own mouth.
Trying not to think about his hunger, Kunta looked out
over the side of the box and saw, at the far end of a field,
what appeared to be a small cluster of people bent over,
seemingly at work. He thought they must be black, but they
were too far away to be sure. He sniffed the air, trying to
pick up their scent, but couldn’t.
As the sun was setting, the box passed another like it,
going in the opposite direction, with a toubob at the reins
and three first-kafo black children riding behind him.
Trudging in chains behind the box were seven adult blacks,
four men wearing ragged clothes and three women in
coarse gowns. Kunta wondered why these were not also
singing; then he saw the deep despair on their faces as
they flashed past. He wondered where toubob was taking
them.
As the dusk deepened, small black bats began

squeaking and darting jerkily here and there, just as they
did in Africa. Kunta heard the toubob say something to the
black one, and before much longer the box turned off onto a
small road. Kunta sat up and soon, in the distance, saw a
large white house through the trees. His stomach clutched
up: What in the name of Allah was to happen now? Was it
here that he was going to be eaten? He slumped back
down in the box and lay as if he were lifeless.

CHAPTER 42
As the box rolled closer and closer to the house, Kunta
began to A smell—and then hear—more black people.
Raising himself up on his elbows, he could just make out
three figures in the early dusk as they approached the
wagon. The largest among them was swinging one of those
small flames Kunta had become familiar with when the
toubob had come down into the dark hold of the big canoe;
only this one was enclosed in something clear and shiny
rather than in metal. He had never seen anything like it
before; it looked hard, but you could see through it as if it
weren’t there. He didn’t have the chance to study it more
closely, though, for the three blacks quickly stepped to one
side as a new toubob strode past them and up to the box,
which promptly stopped beside him. The two toubob
greeted one another, and then one of the blacks held up the
flame so that the toubob in the box could see better as he
climbed down to join the other one. They clasped hands
warmly and then walked off together toward the house.
Hope surged in Kunta. Would the black ones free him
now? But he no sooner thought of it than the flame lit their
faces as they stood looking at him over the sides of the
wagon; they were laughing at him. What kind of blacks
were these who looked down upon their own kind and
worked as goats for the toubob? Where had they come
from? They looked as Africans looked, but clearly they were
not of Africa.
Then the one who had driven the rolling box clucked at
the animal and snapped the thongs and the box moved
ahead. The other blacks walked alongside, still laughing,
until it stopped again. Climbing down, the driver walked
back and in the light of the flame jerked roughly at Kunta’s
chain, making threatening sounds as he unlocked it under
the seat, and then gestured for Kunta to get out.
Kunta fought down the impulse to leap for the throats of
the four blacks. The odds were too high; his chance would

come later. Every muscle in his body seemed to be
screaming as he forced himself onto his knees and began
to crab backward in the box. When he took too long to suit
them, two of the blacks grabbed Kunta, hoisted him roughly
over the side, and half dropped him onto the ground. A
moment later the driver had clicked the free end of Kunta’s
chain around a thick pole.
As he lay there, flooded with pain, fear, and hatred, one
of the blacks set before him two tin containers. In the light of
the flame, Kunta could see that one was nearly filled with
water, and the other held some strange-looking, strangesmelling food. Even so, the saliva ran in Kunta’s mouth and
down in his throat; but he didn’t permit even his eyes to
move. The black ones watching him laughed.
Holding up the flame, the driver went over to the thick
pole and lunged heavily against the locked chain, clearly for
Kunta to see that it could not be broken. Then he pointed
with his foot at the water and the food, making threatening
sounds, and the others laughed again as the four of them
walked away.
Kunta lay there on the ground in the darkness, waiting for
sleep to claim them, wherever they had gone. In his mind,
he saw himself rearing up and surging desperately again
and again against the chain, with all of the strength that he
could muster, until it broke and he could escape to . . . Just
then he smelled a dog approaching him, and heard it
curiously sniffing. Somehow he sensed that it was not his
enemy. But then, as the dog came closer, he heard the
sound of chewing and the click of teeth on the tin pan.
Though he wouldn’t have eaten it himself, Kunta leaped up
in rage, snarling like a leopard. The dog raced away, and
from a short distance started barking. Within a moment, a
door had squeaked open nearby and someone was
running toward him with a flame. It was the driver, and
Kunta sat staring with cold fury as the driver anxiously
examined the chain around the base of the post, and next
where the chain was attached to the iron cuff around
Kunta’s ankle. In the dim yellow light, Kunta saw the driver’s
expression of satisfaction at the empty food plate. With a

hoarse grunt, he walked back to his hut, leaving Kunta in
the darkness wishing that he could fasten his hands around
the throat of the dog.
After a while, Kunta groped around for the container of
water and drank some of the contents, but it didn’t make
him feel any better; in fact, the strength felt drained from his
body; it seemed as if he were only a shell. Abandoning the
idea of breaking the chain—for now, anyway—he felt as if
Allah had turned His back—but why? What thing so terrible
had he ever done? He tried to review everything of any
significance that he had ever done—right or wrong—up to
the morning when he was cutting a piece of wood to make
himself a drum and then, too late, heard a twig snap. It
seemed to him that every time in his life when he had been
punished, it had been because of carelessness and
inattention.
Kunta lay listening to the crickets, the whir of night birds,
and the barking of distant dogs—and once to the sudden
squeak of a mouse, then the crunch of its bones breaking in
the mouth of an animal that had killed it. Every now and then
he would tense up with the urge to run, but he knew that
even if he were able to rip loose his chain, its rattling would
swiftly awaken someone in the huts nearby.
He lay this way—with no thought of sleeping—until the
first streaks of dawn. Struggling as well as his aching limbs
would let him into a kneeling position, he began his suba
prayer. As he was pressing his forehead against the earth,
however, he lost his balance and almost fell over on his
side; it made him furious to realize how weak he had
become.
As the eastern sky slowly brightened, Kunta reached
again for the water container and drank what was left.
Hardly had he finished it when approaching footsteps
alerted him to the return of the four black men. Hurriedly
they hoisted Kunta back into the rolling box, which was
driven to the large white house, where the toubob was
waiting to get onto the seat again. And before he knew it
they were back on the main road, headed in the same
direction as before.

For a time in the clearing day, Kunta lay staring vacantly
at the chain rattling across the floor of the box to where it
was locked under the seat. Then, for a while, he let his eyes
bore with hatred at the backs of the toubob and the black
ahead. He wished he could kill them. He made himself
remember that if he was to survive, having survived so
much until now, that he must keep his senses collected, he
must keep control of himself, he must make himself wait, he
must not expend his energy until he knew that it was the
right time.
It was around midmorning when Kunta heard what he
knew instantly was a blacksmith pounding on metal; lifting
his head, Kunta strained his eyes to see and finally located
the sound somewhere beyond a thick growth of trees they
were passing. He saw that much forest had been freshly
cut, and stumps grubbed up, and in some places, as the
rolling box lurched along, Kunta saw and smelled grayish
smoke rising from where dry brush was being burned. He
wondered if the toubob were thus fertilizing the earth for the
next season’s crops, as it was done in Juffure.
Next, in the distance ahead, he saw a small square hut
beside the road. It seemed to be made of logs, and in a
cleared plot of earth before it, a toubob man was plodding
behind a brown bullock. The toubob’s hands were pressing
down hard against the curving handles of some large thing
pulled by the bullock that was tearing through the earth. As
they came nearer, Kunta saw two more toubob—pale and
thin—squatting on their haunches under a tree; three
equally skinny swine were rooting around them, and some
chickens were pecking for food. In the hut’s doorway stood
a she toubob with red hair. Then, dashing past her, came
three small toubob shouting and waving toward the rolling
box. Catching sight of Kunta, they shrieked with laughter
and pointed; he stared at them as if they were hyena cubs.
They ran alongside the wagon for a good way before
turning back, and Kunta lay realizing that he had seen with
his own eyes an actual family of toubob.
Twice more, far from the road, Kunta saw large white
toubob houses similar to the one where the wagon had

stopped the night before. Each was the height of two
houses, as if one were on top of another; each had in front
of it a row of three or four huge white poles as big around—
and almost as tall—as trees; nearby each was a group of
small, dark huts where Kunta guessed the blacks lived, and
surrounding each was a vastness of cotton fields, all of
them recently harvested, flecked here and there with a tuft
of white.
Somewhere between these two great houses, the rolling
box overtook a strange pair of people walking along the
side of the road. At first Kunta thought they were black, but
as the wagon came closer he saw that their skin was
reddish-brown, and they had long black hair tied to hang
down their backs like a rope, and they walked quickly,
lightly in shoes and loincloths that seemed to be made of
hide, and they carried bows and arrows. They weren’t
toubob, yet they weren’t of Africa either; they even smelled
different. What sort of people were they? Neither one
seemed to notice the rolling box as it went by, enveloping
them in dust.
As the sun began to set, Kunta turned his face toward the
east, and by the time he had finished his silent evening
prayer to Allah, dusk was gathering. He was getting so
weak, after two days without accepting any of the food he
had been offered, that he had to lie down limply in the
bottom of the rolling box, hardly caring any more about what
was happening around him.
But Kunta managed to raise himself up again and look
over the side when the box stopped a little later. Climbing
down, the driver hung one of those lights against the side of
the box, got back in his seat, and resumed the trip. After a
long while the toubob spoke briefly, and the black one
replied; it was the first time since they had started out that
day that the two of them had exchanged a sound. Again the
box stopped, and the driver got out and tossed some kind
of coverlet to Kunta, who ignored it. Climbing back up onto
the seat, the driver and the toubob pulled coverlets over
themselves and set out once again.
Though he was soon shivering, Kunta refused to reach

for the coverlet and draw it over him, not wishing to give
them that satisfaction. They offer me cover, he thought, yet
they keep me in chains, and my own people not only stand
by and let it happen but actually do the toubob’s dirty
business for him. Kunta knew only that he must escape
from this dreadful place—or die in the attempt. He dared
not dream that he would ever see Juffure again, but if he
did, he vowed that all of The Gambia would learn what the
land of toubob was really like.
Kunta was nearly numb with cold when the rolling box
turned suddenly off the main road and onto a bumpier and
smaller one. Again he forced his aching body upward far
enough to squint into the darkness—and there in the
distance he saw the ghostly whiteness of another of the big
houses. As on the previous night, the fear of what would
befall him now coursed through Kunta as they pulled up in
front of the house—but he couldn’t even smell any signs of
the toubob or black ones he expected to greet them.
When the box finally stopped, the toubob on the seat
ahead of him dropped to the ground with a grunt, bent and
squatted down several times to uncramp his muscles, then
spoke briefly to the driver with a gesture back at Kunta, and
then walked away toward the big house.
Still no other blacks had appeared, and as the rolling box
creaked on ahead toward the nearby huts, Kunta lay in the
back feigning indifference. But he was tense in every fiber,
his pains forgotten. His nostrils detected the smell of other
blacks nearby; yet no one came outside. His hopes rose
further. Stopping the box near the huts, the black one
climbed heavily and clumsily to the ground and trudged
over to the nearest hut, the flame bobbing in his hand. As
he pushed the door open, Kunta watched and waited,
ready to spring, for him to go inside; but instead he turned
and came back to the box. Putting his hands under the
seat, he unclicked Kunta’s chain and held the loose end in
one hand as he walked around to the back of the box. Yet
something made Kunta still hold back. The black one
jerked the chain sharply and barked something roughly to
Kunta. As the black one stood watching carefully, Kunta

struggled onto all fours—trying to look even weaker than he
felt—and began crawling backward as slowly and clumsily
as possible. As he had hoped, the black one lost patience,
leaned close, and with one powerful arm, levered Kunta up
and over the end of the wagon, and his upraised knee
helped to break Kunta’s fall to the ground.
At that instant, Kunta exploded upward—his hands
clamping around the driver’s big throat like the bonecracking jaws of a hyena. The flame dropped to the ground
as the black one lurched backward with a hoarse cry; then
he came storming back upright with his big hands
pounding, tearing, and clawing at Kunta’s face and
forearms. But somehow Kunta found the strength to grip the
throat even tighter as he twisted his body desperately to
avoid the driver’s clublike blows with thrashing fists, feet,
and knees. Kunta’s grip would not be broken until the black
one finally stumbled backward and then down, with a deep
gurgling sound, and then went limp.
Springing up, fearing above all another barking dog,
Kunta slipped away like a shadow from the fallen driver and
the overturned flame. He ran bent low, legs crashing
through frosted stalks of cotton. His muscles, so long
unused, screamed with pain, but the cold, rushing air felt
good upon his skin, and he had to stop himself from
whooping out loud with the pleasure of feeling so wildly
free.

CHAPTER 43
The thorny brambles and vines of the brush at the edge of
the forest seemed to reach out and tear at Kunta’s legs.
Ripping them aside with his hands, he plunged on—
stumbling and falling, picking himself up again—deeper
and deeper into the forest. Or so he thought, until the trees
began to thin and he burst suddenly into more low brush.
Ahead of him was another wide cottonfield, and beyond it
yet another big white house with small dark huts beside it.
With shock and panic, Kunta sprang back into the woods,
realizing that all he had done was cross a narrow stretch of
forest that separated two great toubob farms. Crouching
behind a tree, he listened to the pounding of his heart and
head and began to feel a stinging in his hands, arms, and
feet. Glancing down in the bright moonlight, he saw that
they were cut and bleeding from the thorns. But what
alarmed him more was that the moon was already down in
the sky; it would soon be dawn. He knew that whatever he
was going to do, he had little time to decide.
Stumbling back into motion, Kunta knew after only a little
while that his muscles would not carry him much farther. He
must retreat into the thickest part of the forest he could find
and hide there. So he went clawing his way back,
sometimes on all fours, his feet and arms and legs tangling
in the vines, until at last he found himself in a dense grove
of trees. Though his lungs were threatening to burst, Kunta
considered climbing one of them, but the softness of the
thick carpeting of leaves under his feet told him that many
of the trees’ leaves had fallen off, which could make him
easily seen, so that his best concealment would be on the
ground.
Crawling again, he settled finally—just as the sky began
to lighten—in a place of deep undergrowth. Except for the
wheeze of his own breath, everything was very still, and it
reminded him of his long, lonely vigils guarding the
groundnut fields with his faithful wuolo dog. It was just then

that he heard in the distance the deep baying of a dog.
Perhaps he had heard it only in his mind, he thought,
snapping to alertness and straining his ears. But it came
again—only now there were two of them. He didn’t have
much time.
Kneeling toward the east, he prayed to Allah for
deliverance, and just as he finished, the deep-throated
baying came again, closer this time. Kunta decided it was
best to stay hidden where he was, but when he heard the
howling once again—closer still—just a few minutes later, it
seemed that they knew exactly where he was and his limbs
wouldn’t let him remain there a moment longer. Into the
underbrush he crawled again, hunting for a deeper, even
more secreted place. Every inch among the brambles
raking at his hands and knees was torture, but with every
cry from the dogs he scrambled faster and faster. Yet the
barking grew ever louder and closer, and Kunta was sure
that he could hear now the shouting of men behind the
dogs.
He wasn’t moving fast enough; springing up, he began to
run—stumbling through the brambles—as quickly and
quietly as his exhaustion would permit. Almost immediately
he heard an explosion, the shock buckled his knees and
sent him sprawling into a tangle of briars.
The dogs were snarling at the very edge of the thicket
now. Quivering in terror, Kunta could even smell them. A
moment later they were thrashing through the underbrush
straight for him. Kunta made it up onto his knees just as the
two dogs came crashing through the brush and leaped on
him, yowling and slavering and snapping as they knocked
him over, then sprang backward to lunge at him again.
Snarling himself, Kunta fought wildly to fend them off, using
his hands like claws while he tried to crab backward away
from them. Then he heard the men shouting from the edge
of the brush, and again there was an explosion, this time
much louder. As the dogs relented somewhat in their
attack, Kunta heard the men cursing and slashing through
the brush with knives.
Behind the growling dogs, he saw first the black one he

had choked. He held a huge knife in one hand, a short club
and a rope in the other, and he looked murderous. Kunta
lay bleeding on his back, jaws clenched to keep from
screaming, expecting to be chopped into bits. Then Kunta
saw the toubob who had brought him here appear behind
the black one, his face reddish and sweating. Kunta waited
for the flash and the explosion that he had learned on the
big canoe could come from the firestick that a second
toubob—one he hadn’t seen before—pointed at him now.
But it was the black one who now rushed forward furiously,
raising his club, when the chief toubob shouted.
The black one halted, and the toubob shouted at the
dogs, who drew farther back. Then the toubob said
something to the black one, who now moved forward
uncoiling his rope. A heavy blow to Kunta’s head sent him
into a merciful numbing shock. He was dimly aware of
being trussed up so tightly that the rope bit into his already
bleeding skin; then of being half lifted from among the
brambles and made to walk. Whenever he lost his balance
and fell down, a whip seared across his back. When they
finally reached the forest’s edge, Kunta saw three of the
donkeylike animals tied near several trees.
As they approached the animals, he tried to bolt away
again, but a vicious yank on the free end of the rope sent
him tumbling down—and earned him a kick in the ribs. Now
the second toubob, holding the rope, moved ahead of
Kunta, jerking him stumbling toward a tree near where the
animals were tied. The rope’s free end was thrown over a
lower limb, and the black one hauled on it until Kunta’s feet
barely touched the ground.
The chief toubob’s whistling whip began to lash against
Kunta’s back. He writhed under the pain, refusing to make
any sound, but each blow felt as if it had torn him in half.
Finally he began screaming, but the lashing went on.
Kunta was hardly conscious when at last the whip
stopped falling. He sensed vaguely that he was being
lowered and crumpling onto the ground; then that he was
being lifted and draped across the back of one of the
animals; then he was aware of movement.

The next thing Kunta knew—he had no idea how much
time had passed—he was lying spread-eagled on his back
in some kind of hut. A chain, he noticed, was attached to an
iron cuff on each wrist and ankle, and the four chains were
fixed to the base of four poles at the corners of the hut.
Even the slightest movement brought such excruciating
pain that for a long while he lay completely still, his face wet
with sweat and his breath coming in quick, shallow gasps.
Without moving, he could see that a small, square, open
space above him was admitting daylight. Out of the corner
of his eye, he could see a recessed place in the wall, and
within it a mostly burned log and some ashes. On the other
side of the hut, he saw a wide, flat, lumpy thing of cloth on
the floor, with corn shucks showing through its holes; he
guessed it might be used as a bed.
As dusk showed through the open space above him,
Kunta heard—from very nearby—the blowing of a strangesounding horn. And before much more time had passed, he
heard the voices of what he smelled were many black
people passing near where he was. Then he smelled food
cooking. As his spasms of hunger mingled with the
pounding in his head and the stabbing pains in his back
and his thorn-cut arms and legs, he berated himself for not
having waited for a better time to escape, as a trapped
animal would have done. He should have first observed and
learned more of this strange place and its pagan people.
Kunta’s eyes were closed when the hut’s door squeaked
open; he could smell the black one he had choked, who
had helped to catch him. He lay still and pretended to be
asleep—until a vicious kick in the ribs shot his eyes wide
open. With a curse, the black one set something down just
in front of Kunta’s face, dropped a covering over his body,
and went back out, slamming the door behind him.
The smell of the food before him hurt Kunta’s stomach
almost as much as the pain in his back. Finally, he opened
his eyes. There was some kind of mush and some kind of
meat piled upon a flat, round tin, and a squat, round gourd
of water beside it. His spread-eagled wrists made it
impossible to pick them up, but both were close enough for

him to reach with his mouth. Just as he was about to take a
bite, Kunta smelled that the meat was the filthy swine, and
the bile from his stomach came spewing up and onto the tin
plate.
Through the night, he lay drifting into and out of sleep and
wondering about these black ones who looked like Africans
but ate pig. It meant that they were all strangers—or traitors
—to Allah. Silently he begged Allah’s forgiveness in
advance if his lips would ever touch any swine without his
realizing it, or even if he ever ate from any plate that any
swine meat had ever been on.
Soon after the dawn showed again through the square
opening, Kunta heard the strange horn blow once more;
then came the smell of food cooking, and the voices of the
black ones hurrying back and forth. Then the man he
despised returned, bringing new food and water. But when
he saw that Kunta had vomited over the untouched plate
that was already there, he bent down with a string of angry
curses and rubbed the contents into Kunta’s face. Then he
set the new food and water before him, and left.
Kunta told himself that he would choke the food down
later; he was too sick even to think about it now. After a little
while, he heard the door open again; this time he smelled
the stench of toubob. Kunta kept his eyes clamped shut, but
when the toubob muttered angrily, he feared another kick
and opened them. He found himself staring up at the hated
face of the toubob who had brought him here; it was flushed
with rage. The toubob made cursing sounds and told him
with threatening gestures that if he didn’t eat the food, he
would get more beating. Then the toubob left.
Kunta managed to move his left hand far enough for the
fingers to scratch up a small mound of the hard dirt where
the toubob’s foot had been. Pulling the dirt closer, Kunta
pressed his eyes shut and appealed to the spirits of evil to
curse forever the womb of the toubob and his family.

CHAPTER 44
Kunta had counted four days and three nights in the hut.
And each night he had lain listening to the singing from the
huts nearby—and feeling more African than he ever felt in
his own village. What kind of black people they must be, he
thought, to spend their time singing here in the land of the
toubob. He wondered how many of these strange black
ones there were in all of toubob land, those who didn’t
seem to know or care who or what they were.
Kunta felt a special closeness to the sun each time it
rose. He recalled what an old man who had been an alcala
had said down in the darkness of the big canoe: “Each
day’s new sun will remind us that it rose in our Africa, which
is the navel of the earth.”
Although he was spread-eagled by four chains, he had
practiced until he had learned a way to inch forward or
backward on his back and buttocks to study more closely
the small but thick iron rings, like bracelets, that fastened
the chains to the four poles at the hut’s corners. The poles
were about the size of his lower leg, and he knew there was
no hope of his ever breaking one, or of pulling one from the
hard-packed earth floor, for the upper ends went up through
the hut’s roof. With his eyes and then his fingers, Kunta
carefully examined the small holes in the thick metal rings;
he had seen his captors insert a narrow metal thing into
these holes and turn them, making a click sound. When he
shook one of the rings, it made the chain rattle—loud
enough for someone to hear—so he gave that up. He tried
putting one of the rings in his mouth and biting it as hard as
he could; finally one of his teeth cracked, lancing pains
through his head.
Seeking some dirt preferable to that of the floor in order
to make a fetish to the spirits, Kunta scraped out with his
fingers a piece of the reddish, hardened mud chinking
between the logs. Seeing short, black bristles within the
mud, he inspected one curiously; when he realized that it

was a hair from the filthy swine, he flung it away—along with
the dirt—and wiped off the hand that had held it.
On the fifth morning, the black one entered shortly after
the wake-up horn had blown, and Kunta tautened when he
saw that along with his usual short, flat club, the man carried
two thick iron cuffs. Bending down, he locked each of
Kunta’s ankles within the cuffs, which were connected by a
heavy chain. Only then did he unlock the four chains, one by
one, that had kept Kunta spread-eagled. Free to move at
last, Kunta couldn’t stop himself from springing upward—
only to be struck down by the black one’s waiting fist. As
Kunta began pushing himself back upward, a booted foot
dug viciously into his ribs. Stumbling upward once again in
agony and rage, he was knocked down even harder. He
hadn’t realized how much the days of lying on his back had
sapped his strength, and he lay now fighting for breath as
the black one stood over him with an expression that told
Kunta he would keep knocking him down until he learned
who was the master.
Now the black one gestured roughly for Kunta to get up.
When he couldn’t raise his body even onto his hands and
knees, the black one jerked him to his feet with a curse and
shoved him forward, the ankle cuffs forcing Kunta to hobble
awkwardly.
The full force of daylight in the doorway blinded him at
first, but after a moment he began to make out a line of
black people walking hastily nearby in single file, followed
closely by a toubob riding a “hoss,” as he had heard that
strange animal called. Kunta knew from his smell that he
was the one who had held the rope after Kunta had been
trapped by the dogs. There were about ten or twelve blacks
—the women with red or white rags tied on their heads,
most of the men and children wearing ragged straw hats;
but a few were bare-headed, and as far as he could see,
none of them wore a single saphie charm around their
necks or arms. But some of the men carried what seemed
to be long, stout knives, and the line seemed to be heading
in the direction of the great fields. He thought that it must
have been they whom he had heard at night doing all that

singing. He felt nothing but contempt for them. Turning his
blinking gaze, Kunta counted the huts they had come from:
There were ten, including his own—all very small, like his,
and they didn’t have the stout look of the mud huts of his
village, with their roofs of sweet-smelling thatch. They were
arranged in rows of five each—positioned, Kunta noticed,
so that whatever went on among the blacks living there
could be seen from the big white house.
Abruptly the black one began jabbing at Kunta’s chest
with his finger, then exclaiming, “You—you Toby!” Kunta
didn’t understand, and his face showed it, so the black one
kept jabbing him and saying the same thing over and over.
Slowly it dawned on Kunta that the black one was
attempting to make him understand something he was
saying in the strange toubob tongue.
When Kunta continued to stare at him dumbly, the black
one began jabbing at his own chest. “Me Samson!” he
exclaimed. “Samson!” He moved his jabbing finger again
to Kunta. “You To-by! Toby. Massa say you name Toby!”
When what he meant began to sink in, it took all of
Kunta’s self-control to grip his flooding rage without any
facial sign of the slightest understanding. He wanted to
shout “I am Kunta Kinte, first son of Omoro, who is the son
of the holy man Kairaba Kunta Kinte!”
Losing patience with Kunta’s apparent stupidity, the
black one cursed, shrugged his shoulders, and led him
hobbling into another hut, where he gestured for Kunta to
wash himself in a large, wide tin tub that held some water.
The black one threw into the water a rag and a brown chunk
of what Kunta’s nose told him was something like the soap
that Juffure women made of hot melted fat mixed with the
lye of water dripped through wood ashes. The black one
watched, scowling, as Kunta took advantage of the
opportunity to wash himself. When he was through, the
black one tossed to him some different toubob garments to
cover his chest and legs, then a frayed hat of yellowish
straw such as the others wore. How would these pagans
fare under the heat of Africa’s sun, Kunta wondered.
The black one led him next to still another hut. Inside, an

old woman irritably banged down before Kunta a flat tin of
food. He gulped down the thick gruel, and a bread
resembling munko cake, and washed it down with some
hot brown beefy-tasting broth from a gourd cup. Next they
went to a narrow, cramped hut whose smell told of its use in
advance. Pretending to pull down his lower garment, the
black one hunched over a large hole cut into a plank seat
and grunted heavily as if he were relieving himself. A small
pile of corncobs lay in one corner, and Kunta didn’t know
what to make of them. But he guessed that the black one’s
purpose was to demonstrate the toubob’s ways—of which
he wished to learn all that he could, the better to escape.
As the black one led him past the next few huts, they went
by an old man seated in some strange chair; it was rocking
slowly back and forth as he wove dried cornshucks into
what Kunta guessed was a broom. Without looking up, the
old man cast toward him a not unkindly glance, but Kunta
ignored it coldly.
Picking up one of the long, stout knives that Kunta had
seen the others carrying, the black one motioned with his
head toward the distant field, grunting and gesturing for
Kunta to follow him. Hobbling along in the iron cuffs—which
were chafing his ankles—Kunta could see in the field
ahead that the females and the younger blacks were
bending up and down, gathering and piling dried cornstalks
behind the older men in front of them, who slashed down
the stalks with swishing blows of their long knives.
Most of the men’s backs were bared and glistening with
sweat. His eyes searched for any of the branding-iron
marks such as his back bore—but he saw only the scars
that had been left by whips. The toubob rode up on his
“hoss,” exchanged words briefly with the black one, then
fixed a threatening stare on Kunta as the black one
gestured for his attention.
Slashing down about a dozen cornstalks, the black one
turned, bent, and made motions for Kunta to pick them up
and pile them as the others were doing. The toubob jerked
his horse closer alongside Kunta, his whip cocked and the
scowl on his face making his intent clear if Kunta should

refuse to obey. Enraged at his helplessness, Kunta bent
down and picked up two of the cornstalks. Hesitating, he
heard the black one’s knife swishing ahead. Bending over
again, he picked up two more cornstalks, and two more. He
could feel the stares of other black ones upon him from
adjacent rows, and could see the feet of the toubob’s
horse. He could feel the relief of the other blacks, and at
last the horse’s feet moved away.
Without raising his head, Kunta saw that the toubob rode
this way or that to wherever he saw someone who wasn’t
working swiftly enough to please him, and then with an
angry shout, his lash would go cracking down across a
back.
Off in the distance, Kunta saw that there was a road. On
it, a few times during the hot afternoon, through the sweat
pouring down his forehead and stinging in his eyes, he
caught glances of a lone rider on a horse, and twice he saw
a wagon being drawn. Turning his head the other way, he
could see the edge of the forest into which he had tried to
escape. And from where he was piling the cornstalks now,
he could see the forest’s narrowness, which had helped
him to get caught, because he had not realized that
narrowness before. After a while, Kunta had to stop
glancing in that direction, for the urge to spring up and
bound toward those trees was almost irresistible. Each
step he took, in any case, reminded him that he would
never get five steps across the field wearing those iron
hobbles. As he worked through the afternoon, Kunta
decided that before he tried his next escape, he must find
some kind of weapon to fight dogs and men with. No
servant of Allah should ever fail to fight if he is attacked, he
reminded himself. If it was dogs or men, wounded buffalo or
hungry lions, no son of Omoro Kinte would ever entertain
the thought of giving up.
It was after sundown when the horn sounded once again
—this time in the distance. As Kunta watched the other
blacks hurrying into a line, he wished he could stop thinking
of them as belonging to the tribes they resembled, for they
were but unworthy pagans not fit to mingle with those who

had come with him on the big canoe.
But how stupid the toubob must be to have those of
Fulani blood—even such poor specimens as these—
picking up cornstalks instead of tending cattle; anyone
knew that the Fulani were born to tend cattle, that indeed
Fulani and cattle talked together. This thought was
interrupted as the toubob on his “hoss” cracked the whip to
direct Kunta to the end of the line. As he obeyed, the squat,
heavy woman at the end of the line took several quick
forward steps, trying to get as far as possible from Kunta.
He felt like spitting on her. As they began to march—each
hobbling step chafing at his ankles, which had been rubbed
raw and were beginning to seep blood—Kunta heard some
hounds barking far away. He shivered, remembering those
that had tracked him and attacked him. Then his mind
flashed a memory of how his own wuolo had died fighting
the men who had captured him in Africa.
Back in his hut, Kunta kneeled and touched his forehead
to the hard dirt floor in the direction in which he knew the
next sun would rise. He prayed for a long time to make up
for the two prayers he had been unable to perform out in the
field, which would certainly have been interrupted by a lash
across his back from the toubob who rode the “hoss.”
After finishing his prayer, Kunta sat bolt upright and
spoke softly for a while in the secret sira kango tongue,
asking his ancestors to help him endure. Then—pressing
between his fingers a pair of cock’s feathers he had
managed to pick up without being noticed while “Samson”
had led him around that morning—he wondered when he
would get the chance to steal a fresh egg. With the feathers
of the cock and some finely crushed fresh eggshell, he
would be able to prepare a powerful fetish to the spirits,
whom he would ask to bless the dust where his last
footsteps had touched in his village. If that dust was
blessed, his footprints would one day reappear in Juffure,
where every man’s footprints were recognizable to his
neighbors, and they would rejoice at this sign that Kunta
Kinte was still alive and that he would return safely to his
village. Someday.

For the thousandth time, he relived the nightmare of his
capture. If only the cracking twig that alerted him had
snapped a single footstep earlier, he could have leaped
and snatched up his spear. Tears of rage came welling up
into Kunta’s eyes. It seemed to him that for moons without
end, all that he had known was being tracked and attacked
and captured and chained.
No! He would not allow himself to act this way. After all,
he was a man now, seventeen rains of age, too old to weep
and wallow in self-pity. Wiping away the tears, he crawled
onto his thin, lumpy mattress of dried cornshucks and tried
to go to sleep—but all he could think of was the name “Toby” he had been given, and rage rose in him once more.
Furiously, he kicked his legs in frustration—but the
movement only gouged the iron cuffs deeper into his
ankles, which made him cry again.
Would he ever grow up to be a man like Omoro? He
wondered if his father still thought of him, and if his mother
had given to Lamin, Suwadu, and Madi the love that had
been taken away from her when he was stolen. He thought
of all of Juffure, and of how he had never realized more than
now how very deeply he loved his village. As it had often
been on the big canoe, Kunta lay for half the night with
scenes of Juffure flashing through his mind, until he made
himself shut his eyes and finally sleep came.

CHAPTER 45
With each passing day, the hobbles on his ankles made it
more and more difficult and painful for Kunta to get around.
But he kept on telling himself that the chances of gaining
freedom depended upon continuing to force himself to do
whatever was wanted of him, all behind a mask of complete
blankness and stupidity. As he did so, his eyes, ears, and
nose would miss nothing—no weapon he might use, no
toubob weakness he might exploit—until finally his captors
were lulled into removing the cuffs. Then he would run away
again.
Soon after the conch horn blew each morning, Kunta
would limp outside to watch as the strange black ones
emerged from their huts, the sleepiness still in their faces,
and splashed themselves with water from buckets drawn up
in the well nearby. Missing the sound of the village women’s
pestles thumping the couscous for their families’ morning
meals, he would enter the hut of the old cooking woman
and bolt down whatever she gave him—except for any filthy
pork.
As he ate each morning, his eyes would search the hut
for a possible weapon he might take without being
detected. But apart from the black utensils that hung on
hooks above her fireplace, there were only the round, flat tin
things upon which she gave him what he ate with his
fingers. He had seen her eating with a slender metal object
that had three or four closely spaced points to stab the food
with. He wondered what it was, and thought that although it
was small it might be useful—if he could ever catch her
eyes averted for a moment when the shiny object was
within reach.
One morning, as he was eating his gruel, watching as the
cooking woman cut a piece of meat with a knife he hadn’t
seen before and plotting what he would do with it if it were
in his hands instead of hers, he heard a piercing squeal of
agony from outside the hut. It was so close to his thoughts

that he nearly jumped from his seat. Hobbling outside, he
found the others already lined up for work—many of them
still chewing the last bites of “breakfast,” lest they get a
lashing for being late—while there on the ground beside
them lay a swine thrashing about with blood pulsing from its
cut throat as two black men lifted it into a steaming pot of
water, then withdrew it and scraped off the hair. The
swine’s skin was the color of a toubob, he noticed, as they
suspended it by the heels, slit open its belly, and pulled out
its insides. Kunta’s nose stifled at the spreading smell of
guts, and as he marched off with the others toward the
fields, he had to suppress a shudder of revulsion at the
thought of having to live among these pagan eaters of such
a filthy animal.
There was frost on the cornstalks every morning now,
and a haziness hung low over the fields until the heat of the
climbing sun would burn it away. Allah’s powers never
ceased to amaze Kunta—that even in a place as distant as
this toubob land was across the big water, Allah’s sun and
moon still rose and crossed the sky, though the sun was not
so hot nor the moon so beautiful as in Juffure. It was only
the people in this accursed place who seemed not of
Allah’s doing. The toubob were inhuman, and as for the
blacks, it was simply senseless to try to understand them.
When the sun reached the middle of the sky, again the
conch horn blew, signaling another lineup for the arrival of a
wooden sled pulled by an animal similar to a horse, but
more resembling a huge donkey, which Kunta had
overheard being spoken of as a “mule.” Walking beside the
sled was the old cooking woman, who proceeded to pass
out flat cakes of bread and a gourdful of some kind of stew
to each person in the line, who either stood or sat and
gulped it down, then drank some water dipped from a
barrel that was also on the sled. Every day, Kunta warily
smelled the stew before tasting it, to make sure he didn’t
put any swine meat into his mouth, but it usually contained
only vegetables and no meat that he could see or smell at
all. He felt better about eating the bread, for he had seen
some of the black women making corn into meal by beating

it in a mortar with a pestle of stone, about as it was done in
Africa, although Binta’s pestle was made of wood.
Some days they served foods Kunta knew of from his
home, such as groundnuts, and kanjo—which was called
“okra”—and so-so, which was called “black-eyed peas.”
And he saw how much these black ones loved the large
fruit that he heard here being called “watermelon.” But he
saw that Allah appeared to have denied these people the
mangoes, the hearts of palm, the breadfruits, and so many
of the other delicacies that grew almost anywhere one
cared to look on the vines and trees and bushes in Africa.
Every now and then the toubob who had brought Kunta to
this place—the one they called “massa”—rode out into the
fields when they were working. In his whitish straw hat, as
he spoke to the toubob field boss, he gestured with a long,
slender, plaited leather switch, and Kunta noticed that the
toubob “oberseer” grinned and shuffled almost as much as
the blacks whenever he was around.
Many such strange things happened each day, and
Kunta would sit thinking about them back in his hut while he
waited to find sleep. These black ones seemed to have no
concern in their lives beyond pleasing the toubob with his
lashing whip. It sickened him to think how these black ones
jumped about their work whenever they saw a toubob, and
how, if that toubob spoke a word to them, they rushed to do
whatever he told them to. Kunta couldn’t fathom what had
happened to so destroy their minds that they acted like
goats and monkeys. Perhaps it was because they had
been born in this place rather than in Africa, because the
only home they had ever known were the toubob’s huts of
logs glued together with mud and swine bristles. These
black ones had never known what it meant to sweat under
the sun not for toubob masters but for themselves and their
own people.
But no matter how long he stayed among them, Kunta
vowed never to become like them, and each night his mind
would go exploring again into ways to escape from this
despised land. He couldn’t keep from reviling himself
almost nightly for his previous failure to get away. Playing

back in his mind what it had been like among the thorn
bushes and the slavering dogs, he knew that he must have
a better plan for the next time. First he had to make himself
a saphie charm to insure safety and success. Then he must
either find or make some kind of weapon. Even a
sharpened stick could have speared through those dogs’
bellies, he thought, and he could have been away again
before the black one and the toubob had been able to cut
their way through the underbrush to where they had found
him fighting off the dogs. Finally, he must acquaint himself
with the surrounding countryside so that when he escaped
again, he would know where to look for better hiding
places.
Though he often lay awake half the night, restless with
such thoughts, Kunta always awoke before the first crowing
of the cocks, which always aroused the other fowl. The
birds in this place, he noticed, merely twittered and sang—
nothings like the deafening squawks of great flocks of
green parrots that had opened the mornings in Juffure.
There didn’t seem to be any parrots here, or monkeys
either, which always began the day at home by chattering
angrily in the trees overhead, breaking off sticks and hurling
them to the ground at the people underneath. Nor had
Kunta seen any goats here—a fact he found no less
incredible than that these people kept swine in pens
—“pigs” or “hogs,” they called them—and even fed the filthy
things.
But the squealing of the swine, it seemed to Kunta, was
no uglier than the language of the toubob who so closely
resembled them. He would have given anything to hear
even a sentence of Mandinka, or any other African tongue.
He missed his chain mates from the big canoe—even
those who weren’t Moslem—and he wondered what had
happened to them. Where had they been taken? To other
toubob farms such as this one? Wherever they were, were
they longing as he was to hear once again the sweetness
of their own tongues—and yet feeling shut out and alone, as
he did, because they knew nothing of the toubob language?
Kunta realized that he would have to learn something of

this strange speech if he was ever to understand enough
about the toubob or his ways to escape from him. Without
letting anyone know, he already recognized some words:
“pig,” “hog,” “watermelon,” “black-eyed peas,” “oberseer,”
“massa,” and especially “yes suh, massa,” which was about
the only thing he ever heard the black ones say to them. He
had also heard the black ones describe the she toubob
who lived with “massa” in the big white house as “the
missus.” Once, from a distance, Kunta had glimpsed her, a
bony creature the color of a toad’s underbelly, as she
walked around cutting off some flowers among the vines
and bushes that grew alongside the big house.
Most of the other toubob words that Kunta heard still
confused him. But behind his expressionless mask, he tried
hard to make sense of them, and slowly he began to
associate various sounds with certain objects and actions.
But one sound in particular was extremely puzzling to him,
though he heard it exclaimed over and over nearly every
day by toubob and blacks alike. What, he wondered, was a
“nigger”?

CHAPTER 46
With the cutting and piling of the cornstalks at last
completed, the “oberseer” began assigning different blacks
to a variety of tasks after the conch horn blew each dawn.
One morning Kunta was given the job of snapping loose
from their thick vines and piling onto a “wagon,” as he’d
learned they called the rolling boxes, a load of large, heavy
vegetables the color of overripe mangoes and somewhat
resembling the big gourds that women in Juffure dried out
and cut in half to make household bowls. The blacks here
called them “punkins.”
Riding with the “punkins” on the wagon to unload them at
a large building called the “barn,” Kunta was able to see
that some of the black men were sawing a big tree into
thick sections and splitting them with axes and wedges into
firewood that children were stacking into long rows as high
as their heads. In another place, two men were hanging
over thin poles the large leaves of what his nose told him
was the filthy pagan tobacco; he had smelled it once before
on one of the trips he had taken with his father.
As he rode back and forth to the “barn,” he saw that just
as it was done in his own village, many things were being
dried for later use. Some women were collecting a thick
brown “sage-grass,” he heard them call it, and tying it into
bundles. And some of the garden’s vegetables were being
spread out on cloths to dry. Even moss—which had been
gathered by groups of children and plunged into boiling
water—was being dried as well; he had no idea why.
It turned his stomach to watch—and listen—as he
passed a pen where still more swine were being
butchered. Their hair, too, he noticed, was being dried and
saved—probably for mortar—but the thing that really
sickened him was to see the swines bladders being
removed, blown up, tied at the ends, and hung up to dry
along a fence; Allah only knew for what unholy purpose.
When he had finished harvesting and storing the

“punkins,” Kunta was sent with several others to a grove of
trees, the limbs of which they were told to shake vigorously
so that the nuts growing in them would fall to the ground,
where they were picked up by first-kafo children carrying
baskets. Kunta picked up one of the nuts and hid it in his
clothes to try later when he was alone; it wasn’t bad.
When the last of these tasks was done, the men were put
to work repairing things that needed it. Kunta helped
another man fix a fence. And the women seemed to be
busy in a general cleaning of the big white house and their
own huts. He saw some of them washing things, first boiling
them in a large black tub, then rubbing them up and down
against a wrinkled piece of tin in soapy water; he wondered
why none of them knew how to wash clothing properly by
beating it against rocks.
Kunta noticed that the whip of the “oberseer” seemed to
strike down upon someone’s back much less often than
before. He felt in the atmosphere something similar to the
time in Juffure when the harvest had all been put safely into
the storehouses. Even before the evening’s conch horn
would blow to announce the end of the day’s work, some of
the black men would begin cavorting and prancing and
singing among themselves. The “oberseer” would wheel his
horse around and brandish his whip, but Kunta could tell he
didn’t really mean it. And soon the other men would join in,
and then the women—singing words that made no sense at
all to Kunta. He was so filled with disgust for all of them that
he was glad when the conch horn finally signaled for them
to return to their huts.
In the evenings, Kunta would sit down sideways just
inside the doorway of his hut, heels flat against the packed
dirt floor to minimize the iron cuffs’ contact with his festering
ankles. If there was any light breeze, he enjoyed feeling it
blowing against him, and thinking about the fresh carpet of
gold and crimson leaves he would find under the trees the
next morning. At such times, his mind would wander back
to harvest-season evenings in Juffure, with the mosquitoes
and other insects tormenting the people as they sat around
the smoky night fires and settled into long conversations

that would be punctuated now and then by the distant
snarling of leopards and the screaming of hyenas.
One thing he didn’t hear, it occurred to him, and hadn’t
heard since he left Africa, was the sound of drums. The
toubob probably didn’t allow these black people to have
any drums, that had to be the reason. But why? Was it
because the toubob knew and feared how the sound of the
drums could quicken the blood of everyone in a village, until
even the little children and the toothless old ones would
dance wildly? Or how the rhythm of the drums would drive
wrestlers to their greatest feats of strength? Or how the
hypnotic beat could send warriors into a frenzy against their
enemies? Or perhaps the toubob were simply afraid to
allow a form of communication they couldn’t understand that
could travel the distance between one farm and another.
But these heathen blacks wouldn’t understand drumtalk
any better than the toubob. Kunta was forced to concede,
though—if only with great reluctance—that these pagan
blacks might not be totally irredeemable. Ignorant as they
were, some of the things they did were purely African, and
he could tell that they were totally unaware of it themselves.
For one thing, he had heard all his life the very same
sounds of exclamation, accompanied by the very same
hand gestures and facial expressions. And the way these
blacks moved their bodies was also identical. No less so
was the way these blacks laughed when they were among
themselves—with their whole bodies, just like the people of
Juffure.
And Kunta had been reminded of Africa in the way that
black women here wore their hair tied up with strings into
very tight plaits—although African women often decorated
their plaits with colorful beads. And the women of this place
knotted cloth pieces over their heads, although they didn’t
tie them correctly. Kunta saw that even some of these black
men wore their hair in short plaits, too, as some men did in
Africa.
Kunta also saw Africa in the way that black children here
were trained to treat their elders with politeness and
respect. He saw it in the way that mothers carried their

babies with their plump little legs straddling the mothers’
bodies. He noticed even such small customs as how the
older ones among these blacks would sit in the evenings
rubbing their gums and teeth with the finely crushed end of
a twig, which would have been lemongrass root in Juffure.
And though he found it difficult to understand how they could
do it here in toubob land, Kunta had to admit that these
blacks’ great love of singing and dancing was unmistakably
African.
But what really began to soften his heart somewhat
toward these strange people was the fact that over the past
moon, their great showing of distaste for him had continued
only when the “oberseer” or the “massa” was around. When
Kunta came by anywhere the blacks were among
themselves, most of them by now would quickly nod, and he
would notice their expressions of concern for the worsening
condition of his left ankle. Though he always coldly ignored
them and hobbled on, he would sometimes find himself
later almost wishing that he had returned their nods.
One night, when Kunta had fallen asleep but drifted again
into wakefulness, as he often did, he lay staring up into the
darkness and feeling that Allah had somehow, for some
reason, willed him to be here in this place amid the lost
tribe of a great black family that reached its roots back
among the ancient forefathers; but unlike himself, these
black ones in this place had no knowledge whatsoever of
who they were and where they’d come from.
Feeling around him, in some strange way, the presence
of his holy-man grandfather, Kunta reached out into the
darkness. There was nothing to be felt but he began
speaking aloud to the Alquaran Kairaba Kunta Kinte,
imploring him to make known the purpose of his mission
here, if there be any. He was startled to hear the sound of
his own voice. Up to this moment in the toubob’s land, he
had never uttered a sound addressed to anyone but Allah,
except for those cries that had been torn from him by a
lash.
The next morning, as he joined the others in line for the
march to work, Kunta almost caught himself saying,

“Mornin’,” as he had heard them greet each other every
day. But though he knew enough toubob words by now not
only to understand a good deal of what was said to him but
also to make himself somewhat understood as well,
something made him decide to continue keeping that
knowledge to himself.
It occurred to Kunta that these blacks masked their true
feelings for the toubob as carefully as he did his changing
attitude toward them. He had by now many times
witnessed the blacks’ grinning faces turn to bitterness the
instant a toubob turned his head away. He had seen them
break their working tools on purpose, and then act totally
unaware of how it happened as the “oberseer” bitterly
cursed them for their clumsiness. And he had seen how
blacks in the field, for all their show of rushing about
whenever the toubob was nearby, were really taking twice
as much time as they needed to do whatever they were
doing.
He was beginning to realize, too, that like the Mandinkas’
own secret sira kango language, these blacks shared
some kind of communication known only among
themselves. Sometimes when they were working out in the
field, Kunta’s glance would catch a small, quick gesture or
movement of the head. Or one of them would utter some
strange, brief exclamation; at unpredictable intervals
another, and then another, would repeat it, always just
beyond the hearing of the “oberseer” as he rode about on
his horse. And sometimes with him right there among them,
they would begin singing something that told Kunta—even
though he couldn’t understand it—that some message was
being passed, just as the women had done for the men on
the big canoe.
When darkness had fallen among the huts and the lamp
lights no longer glowed from the windows in the big house,
Kunta’s sharp ears would detect the swift rustlings of one or
two blacks slipping away from “slave row”—and a few
hours later, slipping back again. He wondered where they
were going and for what—and why they were crazy enough
to come back. And the next morning in the fields, he would

try to guess which of them had done it. Whoever it was, he
thought he just might possibly learn to trust them.
Two huts away from Kunta, the blacks would seat
themselves around the small fire of the old cooking woman
every evening after “supper,” and the sight would fill Kunta
with a melancholy memory of Juffure, except that the
women here sat with the men, and some of both sexes
were puffing away on pagan tobacco pipes that now and
then glowed dully in the gathering darkness. Listening
intently from where he sat just inside his doorway, Kunta
could hear them talking over the rasping of the crickets and
the distant hooting of owls in the forest. Though he couldn’t
understand the words, he felt the bitterness in their tone.
Even in the dark, Kunta by now could picture in his mind
the face of whichever black was talking. His mind had filed
away the voices of each of the dozen adults, along with the
name of the tribe he felt that particular one most resembled.
He knew which ones among them generally acted more
carefree, and which seldom even smiled, a few of them not
even around the toubob.
These evening meetings had a general pattern that
Kunta had learned. The usual first talker was usually the
woman who cooked in the big house. She mimicked things
said by both the “massa” and the “missus.” Then he heard
the big black one who had captured him imitating the
“oberseer,” and he listened with astonishment as the others
all but choked trying to stifle their laughter, lest they be
heard in the big white house.
But then the laughter would subside and they would sit
around talking among themselves. Kunta heard the
helpless, haunted tone of some, and the anger of others,
even though he grasped only a little of what they discussed.
He had the feeling that they were recalling things that had
happened to them earlier in their lives. Some of the women
in particular would be talking and then suddenly break into
tears. Finally the talking would grow quiet as one of the
women began to sing, and the others joined in. Kunta
couldn’t understand the words—“No-body knows de
troubles I’se seed”—but he felt the sadness in the singing.

At last there came a voice that Kunta knew was the
oldest man among them, the one who sat in the rocking
chair and wove things of cornshucks, and who blew the
conch horn. The others would bow their heads, and he
would begin speaking slowly what Kunta guessed was
some kind of prayer, though it was certainly not to Allah. But
Kunta remembeed what was said by the old alcala down in
the big canoe: “Allah knows every language.” While the
prayer continued, Kunta kept hearing the same odd sound
exclaimed sharply by both the old man and others who kept
interrupting him with it: “Oh Lawd!” He wondered if this “Oh
Lawd” was their Allah.
A few days later, the night winds began to blow with a
coldness beyond any that Kunta had ever felt, and he woke
up to find the last leaves stripped from the trees. As he
stood shivering in line to go out to the fields, he was
bewildered when the “oberseer” directed everyone into the
barn instead. Even the massa and the missus were there,
and with them four other finely dressed toubob who
watched and cheered as the blacks were separated into
two groups and made to face each other at ripping off and
flinging aside the whitened, dried outside shucks from the
piled harvest of corn.
Then the toubob and the blacks—in two groups—ate and
drank their fill. The old black man who prayed at night then
took up some kind of musical instrument with strings
running down its length—it reminded Kunta of the ancient
kora from his own homeland—and began to make some
very odd music on it by jerking some kind of wand back
and forth across the strings. The other blacks got up and
began to dance—wildly—as the watching toubob, even the
“oberseer,” gleefully clapped and shouted from the
sidelines. Their faces reddened with excitement, all the
toubob suddenly stood up, and as the blacks shrank to the
side, they clapped their way out into the middle of the floor
and began to dance in an awkward way while the old man
played as if he had gone mad and the other blacks jumped
up and down and clapped and screamed as if they were
seeing the greatest performance of their lives.

It made Kunta think of a story he had been told by his
beloved old Grandmother Nyo Boto when he was in the first
kafo. She had told how the king of a village had called
together all of the musicians and commanded them to play
their very best for him to dance for the people, including
even the slaves. And the people were all delighted and they
left all singing loudly to the skies and there had never been
another king like him.
Back in his hut later that night reflecting upon what he had
seen, it occurred to Kunta that in some strong, strange, and
very deep way, the blacks and the toubob had some need
for each other. Not only during the dancing in the barn, but
also on many other occasions, it had seemed to him that
the toubob were at their happiest when they were close
around the black ones—even when they were beating
them.

CHAPTER 47
Kunta’s left ankle had become so infected that pus draining
from the wound all but covered the iron cuff with a sickly
yellow slickness, and his crippled limping finally caused the
“oberseer” to take a close look. Turning his head away, he
told Samson to remove the cuffs.
It was still painful to raise his foot, but Kunta was so
thrilled to be unfettered that he hardly felt it. And that night,
after the others had gone to bed and all had become still,
Kunta limped outside and stole away once again. Crossing
a field in the opposite direction from the one he had fled
across the last time, he headed toward what he knew was
a wider, deeper forest on the other side. He had reached a
ravine and was clambering up the far side on his belly when
he heard the first sound of a movement in the distance. He
lay still with his heart pounding as he heard heavy footfalls
approaching and finally the hoarse voice of Samson
cursing and shouting, “Toby! Toby!” Gripping a stout stick
he had sharpened into a crude spear, Kunta felt strangely
calm, almost numb, as his eyes coldly watched the bulky
silhouette moving quickly this way and that in the brush at
the top of the ravine. Something made him sense that
Samson feared for himself if Kunta succeeded in getting
away. Closer and closer he stalked—Kunta coiled tight but
motionless as a stone—and then the moment came.
Hurling the spear with all his might, he grunted slightly with
the pain it caused and Samson, hearing him, sprang
instantly to one side; it missed him by a hair.
Kunta tried to run, but the weakness of his ankles made
him hardly able to keep upright, and when he whirled to
fight, Samson was upon him, slamming with his greater
weight behind each blow, until Kunta was driven to the
earth. Hauling him back upward, Samson kept pounding,
aiming only at his chest and belly, as Kunta tried to keep
his body twisting as he gouged and bit and clawed. Then
one massive blow sent him crashing down again, this time

to stay. He couldn’t even move to defend himself any
further.
Gasping for breath, Samson tied Kunta’s wrists tightly
together with a rope, and then began jerking Kunta along by
its free end, back toward the farm, kicking him savagely
whenever he stumbled or faltered, and cursing him every
step of the way.
It was all Kunta could do to keep staggering and lurching
behind Samson. Dizzy from pain and exhaustion—and
disgust with himself—he grimly anticipated the beatings he
would receive when they reached his hut. But when they
finally arrived—shortly before dawn—Samson only gave
him another kick or two and then left him alone lying in a
heap.
Kunta was so used up that he trembled. But with his teeth
he began to gnash and tear at the fibers of the rope binding
his wrists together, until his teeth hurt like flashes of fire. But
the rope finally came apart just as the conch horn blew.
Kunta lay weeping. He had failed again, and he prayed to
Allah.
Through the days that followed, it was as if he and
Samson shared some secret pact of hatred. Kunta knew
how closely he was being watched; he knew that Samson
was waiting for any excuse to hurt him in a manner the
toubob would approve. Kunta responded by going through
the motions of doing whatever work he was given to do as
if nothing had happened—but even faster and more
efficiently than before. He had noticed how the “oberseer”
paid less attention to those who worked the hardest or did
the most grinning. Kunta couldn’t bring himself to grin, but
with grim satisfaction he noted that the more he sweated,
the less often the lash fell across his back.
One evening after work, Kunta was passing near the
barn when he spotted a thick iron wedge lying half
concealed among some of the sawed sections of trees
where the “oberseer” had two men splitting firewood.
Glancing around quickly in all directions, and seeing no one
watching, Kunta snatched up the wedge and, concealing it
in his shirt, hurried to his hut. Using it to dig a hole in the

hard dirt floor, he placed the wedge in the hole, packed the
loose dirt back over it, then beat it down carefully with a
rock until the floor looked completely undisturbed.
He spent a sleepless night worrying that a wedge
discovered missing might cause all of the cabins to be
searched. He felt better when there was no outcry the
following day, but he still wasn’t sure just how he might
employ the wedge to help himself escape, when that time
came again.
What he really wanted to get his hands on was one of
those long knives that the “oberseer” would issue to a few
of the men each morning. But each evening he would see
the “oberseer” demanding the knives back and counting
them carefully. With one of those knives, he could cut brush
to move more quickly within a forest, and if he had to, he
could kill a dog—or a man.
One cold afternoon almost a moon later—the sky bleak
and slaty—Kunta was on his way across one of the fields to
help another man repair a fence when, to his astonishment,
what looked like salt began to fall from the sky, at first
lightly, then more rapidly and thickly. As the salt became a
flaky whiteness, he heard the black nearby exclaiming,
“Snow!” and guessed that was what they called it. When he
bent down to pick some of it up, it was cold to his touch—
and even colder when he licked it off a finger with his
tongue. It stung, and it had no taste whatever. He tried to
smell it, but not only did there seem to be no odor either, it
also disappeared into watery nothingness. And wherever
he looked on the ground was a whitish film.
But by the time he reached the other side of the field, the
“snow” had stopped and even begun to melt away. Hiding
his amazement, Kunta composed himself and nodded
silently to his black partner, who was waiting by the broken
fence. They set to work—Kunta helping the other man to
string a kind of metal twine that he called “wire.” After a
while they reached a place almost hidden by tall grass, and
as the other man hacked some of it down with the long
knife he carried, Kunta’s eyes were gauging the distance
between where he stood and the nearest woods. He knew

that Samson was nowhere near and the “oberseer” was
keeping watch in another field that day. Kunta worked
busily, to give the other man no suspicion of what was in his
mind. But his breath came tensely as he stood holding the
wire tight and looking down on the head of the man bent
over his work. The knife had been left a few steps behind
them, where the chopping of the brush had stopped.
With a silent prayer to Allah, Kunta clasped his hands
together, lifted them high, and brought them down across
the back of the man’s neck with all the violence of which his
slight body was capable. The man crumpled without a
sound, as if he had been poleaxed. Within a moment,
Kunta had bound the man’s ankles and wrists with the wire.
Snatching up the long knife, Kunta suppressed the impulse
to stab him—this was not the hated Samson—and went
running toward the woods, bent over almost double. He felt
a lightness, as if he were running in a dream, as if this
weren’t really happening at all.
He came out of it a few moments later—when he heard
the man he had left live yelling at the top of his lungs. He
should have killed him, Kunta thought, furious with himself,
as he tried to run yet faster. Instead of fighting his way
deeply into the underbrush when he reached the woods, he
skirted it this time. He knew that he had to achieve distance
first, then concealment. If he got far enough fast enough, he
would have time to find a good place to hide and rest
before moving on under cover of the night.
Kunta was prepared to live in the woods as the animals
did. He had learned many things about this toubob land by
now, together with what he already knew from Africa. He
would capture rabbits and other rodents with snare traps
and cook them over a fire that wouldn’t smoke. As he ran,
he stayed in the area where the brush would conceal him
but wasn’t thick enough to slow him down.
By nightfall, Kunta knew that he had run a good distance.
Yet he kept going, crossing gullies and ravines, and for
quite a way down the bed of a shallow stream. Only when it
was completely dark did he allow himself to stop, hiding
himself in a spot where the brush was dense but from which

he could easily run if he had to. As he lay there in the
darkness, he listened carefully for the sound of dogs. But
there was nothing but stillness all around him. Was it
possible? Was he really going to make it this time?
Just then he felt a cold fluttering on his face, and reached
up with his hand. “Snow” was falling again! Soon he was
covered—and surrounded—by whiteness as far as he
could see. Silently it fell, deeper and deeper, until Kunta
began to fear he was going to be buried in it; he was
already freezing. Finally he couldn’t stop himself from
leaping up and running to look for better cover.
He had run a good way when he stumbled and fell; he
wasn’t hurt, but when he looked back, he saw with horror
that his feet had left a trail in the snow so deep that a blind
man could follow him. He knew that there was no way he
could erase the tracks, and he knew that the morning was
now not far away. The only possible answer was more
distance. He tried to increase his speed, but he had been
running most of the night, and his breath was coming in
labored gasps. The long knife had begun to feel heavy; it
would cut brush, but it wouldn’t melt “snow.” The sky was
beginning to lighten in the east when he heard, far ahead of
him, the faint sound of conch horns. He changed course in
the next stride. But he had the sinking feeling that there was
nowhere he could find to rest safely amid this blanketing
whiteness.
When he heard the distant baying of the dogs, a rage
flooded up in him such as he had never felt before. He ran
like a hunted leopard, but the barking grew louder and
louder, and finally, when he glanced back over his shoulder
for the tenth time, he saw them gaining on him. The men
couldn’t be far behind. Then he heard a gun fire, and
somehow it propelled him forward even faster than before.
But the dogs caught up with him anyway. When they were
but strides away, Kunta whirled and crouched down,
snarling back at them. As they came lunging forward with
their fangs bared, he too lunged at them, slashing open the
first dog’s belly with a single sideways swipe of the knife;
with another blur of his arm, he hacked the blade between

the eyes of the next one.
Springing away, Kunta began running again. But soon he
heard the men on horses crashing through the brush behind
him, and he all but dove for the deeper brush where the
horses couldn’t go. Then there was another shot, and
another—and he felt a flashing pain in his leg. Knocked
down in a heap, he had staggered upright again when the
toubob shouted and fired again, and he heard the bullets
thud into trees by his head. Let them kill me, thought Kunta;
I will die as a man should. Then another shot hit the same
leg, and it smashed him down like a giant fist. He was
snarling on the ground when he saw the “oberseer” and
another toubob coming toward him with their guns leveled
and he was about to leap up and force them to shoot him
again and be done with it, but the wounds in his leg
wouldn’t let him rise.
The other toubob held his gun at Kunta’s head as the
“oberseer” jerked off Kunta’s clothing until he stood naked
in the snow, the blood trickling down his leg and staining
the whiteness at his feet. Cursing with each breath, the
“oberseer” knocked Kunta all but senseless with his fist;
then both of them tied him facing a large tree, with his
wrists bound on the other side.
The lash began cutting into the flesh across Kunta’s
shoulders and back, with the “oberseer” grunting and Kunta
shuddering under the force of each blow. After a while
Kunta couldn’t stop himself from screaming with the pain,
but the beating went on until his sagging body pressed
against the tree. His shoulders and back were covered with
long, half-opened bleeding welts that in some places
exposed the muscles beneath. He couldn’t be sure, but the
next thing Kunta knew he had the feeling he was falling.
Then he felt the coldness of the snow against him and
everything went black.
He came to in his hut, and along with his senses, pain
returned—excruciating and enveloping. The slightest
movement made him cry out in agony; and he was back in
chains. But even worse, his nose informed him that his
body was wrapped from feet to chin in a large cloth soaked

with grease of the swine. When the old cooking woman
came in with food, he tried to spit at her, but succeeded
only in throwing up. He thought he saw compassion in her
eyes.
Two days later, he was awakened early in the morning by
the sounds of festivities. He heard black people outside the
big house shouting “Christmas gif’, Massa!,” and he
wondered what they could possibly have to celebrate. He
wanted to die, so that his soul could join the ancestors; he
wanted to be done forever with misery unending in this
toubob land, so stifling and stinking that he couldn’t draw a
clean breath in it. He boiled with fury that instead of beating
him like a man, the toubob had stripped him naked. When
he became well, he would take revenge—and he would
escape again. Or he would die.

CHAPTER 48
When Kunta finally emerged from his hut, again with both of
his ankles shackled, most of the other blacks avoided him,
rolling their eyes in fear of being near him, and moving
quickly elsewhere, as if he were a wild animal of some
kind. Only the old cooking woman and the old man who
blew the conch horn would look at him directly.
Samson was nowhere to be seen. Kunta had no idea
where he had gone, but Kunta was glad. Then, a few days
later, he saw the hated black one bearing the unhealed
marks of a lash; he was gladder still. But at the slightest
excuse, the lash of the toubob “oberseer” fell once again on
Kunta’s back as well.
He knew every day that he was being watched as he
went through the motions of his work, like the others moving
more quickly when the toubob came anywhere near, then
slowing down as they left. Unspeaking, Kunta did whatever
he was ordered to do. And when the day was over, he
carried his melancholy—deep within himself—from the
fields back to the dingy little hut where he slept.
In his loneliness, Kunta began talking to himself, most
often in imaginary conversations with his family. He would
talk to them mostly in his mind, but sometimes aloud. “Fa,”
he would say, “these black ones are not like us. Their
bones, their blood, their sinews, their hands, their feet are
not their own. They live and breathe not for themselves but
for the toubob. Nor do they own anything at all, not even
their own children. They are fed and nursed and bred for
others.”
“Mother,” he would say, “these women wear cloths upon
their heads, but they do not know how to tie them; there is
little that they cook that does not contain the meat or the
greases of the filthy swine, and many of them have lain
down with the toubob, for I see their children who are
cursed with the sasso-borro half color.”
And he would talk with his brothers Lamin, Suwadu, and

Madi, telling them that even the wisest of the elders could
never really adequately impress upon them the importance
of realizing that the most vicious of the forest animals was
not half as dangerous as the toubob.
And so the moons passed in this way, and soon the
spikes of “ice” had fallen and melted into water. And before
long after that, green grass came peeping through the darkreddish earth, the trees began to show their buds, and the
birds were singing once again. And then came the plowing
of the fields and the planting of the endless rows. Finally the
sun’s rays upon the soil made it so hot that Kunta was
obliged to step quickly, and if he had to stop, to keep his
feet moving to prevent them from blistering.
Kunta had bided his time and minded his own business,
waiting for his keepers to grow careless and take their
eyes off him once again. But he had the feeling that even
the other blacks were still keeping an eye on him, even
when the “oberseer” and the other toubob weren’t around.
He had to find some way not to be so closely watched.
Perhaps he could take advantage of the fact that the
toubob didn’t look at blacks as people but as things. Since
the toubob’s reactions to these black things seemed to
depend on how those things acted, he decided to act as
inconspicuous as possible.
Though it made him despise himself, Kunta forced
himself to start behaving the way the other blacks did
whenever the toubob came anywhere near. Hard as he
tried, he couldn’t bring himself to grin and shuffle, but he
made an effort to appear co-operative, if not friendly, and
he made a great show of looking busy. He had also learned
a good many more toubob words by now, always keenly
listening to everything that was said around him, either out
in the fields or around the huts at night, and though he still
chose not to speak himself, he began to make it clear that
he could understand.
Cotton—one of the main crops on the farm—grew
quickly here in the toubob’s land. Soon its flowers had
turned into hard green bolls and split open, each filled with
fluffy balls, until the fields as far as Kunta could see were

vast seas of whiteness, dwarfing the fields he had seen
around Juffure. It was time to harvest, and the wake-up horn
began blowing earlier in the morning, it seemed to Kunta,
and the whip of the “oberseer” was cracking in warning
even before the “slaves,” as they were called, could tumble
from their beds.
By watching others out in the field, Kunta soon learned
that a hunched position made his long canvas sack seem
to drag less heavily behind him as the endlessly repeated
handfuls of cotton from the bolls slowly filled his sack. Then
he would drag it to be emptied in the wagon that waited at
the end of the rows. Kunta filled his sack twice a day, which
was about average, although there were some—hated and
envied by the others for bending their backs so hard to
please the toubob, and succeeding at it—who could pick
cotton so fast that their hands seemed a blur; by the time
the horn blew at dusk, their sacks would have been filled
and emptied into the wagon at least three times.
When each cotton wagon was filled, it was taken to a
storehouse on the farm, but Kunta noticed that the
overflowing wagons of tobacco harvested in the larger
fields adjoining his were driven away somewhere down the
road. Four days passed before it returned empty—just in
time to pass another loaded wagon on its way out. Kunta
also began seeing other loaded tobacco wagons,
doubtlessly from other farms, rolling along the main road in
the distance, drawn sometimes by as many as four mules.
Kunta didn’t know where the wagons were going, but he
knew they went a long way, for he had seen the utter
exhaustion of Samson and other drivers when they had
returned from one of their trips.
Perhaps they would go far enough to take him to
freedom. Kunta found it hard to get through the next several
days in his excitement with this tremendous idea. He ruled
out quickly any effort to hide on one of this farm’s wagons;
there would be no time without someone’s eyes too near
for him to slip unnoticed into a load of tobacco. It must be a
wagon moving along the big road from some other farm.
Using the pretext of going to the outhouse late that night,

Kunta made sure that no one was about, then went to a
place where he could see the road in the moonlight. Sure
enough—the tobacco wagons were traveling at night. He
could see the flickering lights each wagon carried, until
finally those small specks of brightness would disappear in
the distance.
He planned and schemed every minute, no details of the
local tobacco wagons escaping his notice. Picking in the
fields, his hands fairly flew; he even made himself grin if the
“oberseer” rode anywhere near. And all the time he was
thinking how he would be able to leap onto the rear end of a
loaded, rolling wagon at night and burrow under the
tobacco without being heard by the drivers up front
because of the bumping wagon’s noise, and unseen not
only because of the darkness but also because of the tall
mound of leaves between the drivers and the rear of the
wagon. It filled him with revulsion even to think of having to
touch and smell the pagan plant he had managed to stay
away from all his life, but if that was the only way to get
away, he felt sure that Allah would forgive him.

CHAPTER 49
Waiting one evening soon afterward behind the “outhouse,”
as the slaves called the hut where they went to relieve
themselves, Kunta killed with a rock one of the rabbits that
abounded in the woods nearby. Carefully he sliced it thinly
and dried it as he had learned in manhood training, for he
would need to take some nourishment along with him.
Then, with a smooth rock, he honed the rusted and bent
knife blade he had found and straightened, and wired it into
a wooden handle that he had carved. But even more
important than the food and the knife was the saphie he
had made—a cock’s feather to attract the spirits, a horse’s
hair for strength, a bird’s wishbone for success—all tightly
wrapped and sewn within a small square of gunnysacking
with a needle he had made from a thorn. He realized the
foolishness of wishing that his saphie might be blessed by
a holy man, but any saphie was better than no saphie at all.
He hadn’t slept all night, but far from being tired, it was all
Kunta could do not to burst with excitement—to keep from
showing any emotion at all—throughout the next day’s
working in the fields. For tonight would be the night. Back in
his hut after the evening meal, his hands trembled as he
pushed into his pocket the knife and the dried slices of
rabbit, then tied his saphie tightly around his upper right
arm. He could hardly stand hearing the familiar early-night
routine of the other blacks; for each moment, which
seemed to be taking forever to pass, might bring some
unexpected occurrence that could ruin his plan. But the
bone-weary field hands’ mournful singing and praying soon
ended. To let them get safely asleep, Kunta waited as
much longer as he dared.
Then, grasping his homemade knife, he eased out into
the dark night. Sensing no one about, he bent low and ran
as fast as he could go, plunging after a while into a small,
thick growth of brush just below where the big road curved.
He huddled down, breathing hard. Suppose no more

wagons were coming tonight? The thought lanced through
him. And then a nearly paralyzing, worse fear: Suppose the
driver’s helper sits as a rear lookout? But he had to take
the chance.
He heard a wagon coming minutes before he saw its
flickering light. Teeth clenched, muscles quivering, Kunta
felt ready to collapse. The wagon seemed barely crawling.
But finally, it was directly across from him and slowly
passing. Two dim figures sat on its front seat. Feeling like
screaming, he lunged from the growth of brush. Trotting low
behind the squeaking, lurching wagon, Kunta awaited the
road’s next rough spot; then his outstretched hand clawed
over the tailboard, and he was vaulting upward, over the
top, and into the mountain of tobacco. He was on board!
Frantically he went burrowing in. The leaves were packed
together far more tightly than he had expected, but at last
his body was concealed. Even after pawing open an air
space to breathe more freely—the stench of the filthy weed
almost made him sick—he had to keep moving his back
and shoulders a bit this way or that, trying to get
comfortable under the pressing weight. But finally he found
the right position, and the rocking motion of the wagon,
cushioned by the leaves, which were very warm around
him, soon made him drowsy.
A loud bump brought him awake with a sickening start,
and he began to think about being discovered. Where was
the wagon going, and how long would it take to get there?
And when it arrived, would he be able to slip away unseen?
Or would he find himself trailed and trapped again? Why
had he not thought of this before? A picture flashed into his
mind of the dogs, and Samson, and the toubob with their
guns, and Kunta shuddered. Considering what they did to
him last time, he knew that this time his life would depend
upon not getting caught.
But the more he thought of it, the stronger his urge grew
to leave the wagon now. With his hands, he parted the
leaves enough to poke his head out. Out in the moonlight
were endless fields and countryside. He couldn’t jump out
now. The moon was bright enough to help his pursuers as

much as it could help him. And the longer he rode, the less
likely it was that the dogs could ever track him. He covered
up the hole and tried to calm himself, but every time the
wagon lurched, he feared that it was going to stop, and his
heart would nearly leap from his chest.
Much later, when he opened the hole again and saw that
it was nearing dawn, Kunta made up his mind. He had to
leave the wagon right now, before he came any closer to
the enemy of open daylight. Praying to Allah, he grasped
the handle of his knife and began to wriggle out of his hole.
When his entire body was free, he waited again for the
wagon to lurch. It seemed to take an eternity, but when it
finally did he made a light leap—and was on the road. A
moment later he was out of sight in the bushes.
Kunta swung in a wide arc to avoid two toubob farms
where he could see the familiar big house with the small,
dark huts nearby. The sounds of their wake-up horns
floated across the still air to his ears, and as the dawn
brightened, he was slashing through underbrush deeper
and deeper into what he knew was a wide expanse of
forest. It was cool in the dense woods, and the dew that
sprinkled onto him felt good, and he swung his knife as if it
were weightless, grunting in his pleasure with each swing.
During the early afternoon, he happened upon a small
stream of clear water tippling over mossy rocks, and frogs
jumped in alarm as he stopped to drink from it with his
cupped hands. Looking around and feeling safe enough to
rest for a while, he sat down on the bank and reached into
his pocket. Taking out a piece of the dried rabbit and
swashing it around in the stream, he put it in his mouth and
chewed. The earth was springy and soft beneath him, and
the only sounds he could hear were made by the toads and
the insects and the birds. He listened to them as he ate,
and watched sunlight stippling the leafy boughs above him
with splashes of gold among the green, and he told himself
that he was glad he didn’t have to run as hard or as steadily
as he had before, for exhaustion had made him an easy
prey.
On and on he ran, for the rest of the afternoon, and after

pausing for his sundown prayer, he went on still farther until
darkness—and weariness—forced him to stop for the
night. Lying on his bed of leaves and grass, he decided that
later he would build himself a shelter of forked sticks with a
roof of grass, as he had learned in manhood training. Sleep
claimed him quickly, but several times during the night he
was awakened by mosquitoes, and he heard the snarlings
of wild animals in the distance as they made their kills.
Up with the first rays of the sun, Kunta quickly sharpened
his knife and then was off again. A while later he came
upon what was clearly a trail where a number of men had
walked; although he could see that it had not been used in
a long time, he ran back into the woods as fast as he could
go.
Deeper and deeper into the forest, his knife kept
slashing. Several times he saw snakes, but on the toubob
farm he had learned that they would not attack unless they
were frightened or cornered, so he let them slither away.
Now and then he would imagine that he heard a dog
barking somewhere, and he would shiver, for more than
men, he feared dogs’ noses.
Several times during the day, Kunta got into foliage so
dense that in some places even his knife wasn’t stout
enough to clear a path, and he had to return and find
another way. Twice he stopped to sharpen his knife, which
seemed to be getting dull more and more often, but when it
didn’t work any better afterward, he suspected that the
constant slashing at briars, bushes, and vines had begun to
sap his strength. So he paused to rest again, ate some
more rabbit—and some wild blackberries—and drank
water that he found in cupped leaves of plants at the bases
of trees. That night he rested by another stream, plunging
into sleep the moment he lay down, deaf to the cries of
animals and night birds, insensible even to the buzzing and
biting of the insects that were drawn to his sweaty body.
It wasn’t until the next morning that Kunta began to think
about where he was going. He hadn’t let himself think of it
before. Since he couldn’t know where he was going
because he didn’t have any idea where he was, he decided

that his only course was to avoid nearness to any other
human beings, black or toubob, and to keep running toward
the sunrise. The maps of Africa he’d seen as a boy showed
the big water to the west, so he knew that eventually he’d
reach it if he kept moving east. But when he thought about
what might happen then, even if he wasn’t caught; of how
he would ever be able to cross the water, even if he had a
boat; of how he would ever get safely to the other side,
even if he knew the way—he began to get deeply
frightened. Between prayers, he fingered the saphie charm
on his arm even as he ran.
That night, as he lay hidden beneath a bush, he found
himself thinking of the Mandinkas’ greatest hero, the
warrior Sundiata, who had been a crippled slave so meanly
treated by his African master that he had escaped and
gone hiding in the swamps, where he found and organized
other escaped ones into a conquering army that carved out
the vast Mandinka Empire. Maybe, Kunta thought as he set
out again on this fourth day, he could find other escaped
Africans somehow here in the land of toubob, and maybe
they would be as desperate as he was to feel their toes
once again in the dust of their native land. Maybe enough of
them together could build or steal a big canoe. And then . . .
Kunta’s reverie was interrupted by a terrible sound. He
stopped in his tracks. No, it was impossible! But there was
no mistake; it was the baying of hounds. Wildly he went
hacking at the brush, stumbling and falling and scrambling
up again. Soon he was so tired that when he fell again, he
just sat there, very still, clutching the handle of his knife and
listening. But he heard nothing now—nothing but the
sounds of the birds and the insects.
Had he really heard the dogs? The thought tormented
him. He didn’t know which was his worst enemy, the toubob
or his own imagination. He couldn’t afford to assume that
he hadn’t really heard them, so he started running again;
the only safety was to keep moving. But soon—exhausted
not only by having to race so far and so fast, but also by
fear itself—he had to rest again. He would close his eyes
for just a moment, and then get going again.

He awoke in a sweat, sitting bolt upright. It was pitch
dark! He had slept the day away! Shaking his head, he was
trying to figure out what had wakened him when suddenly
he heard it again: the baying of dogs, this time much closer
than before. He sprang up and away so frantically that it
was several moments before it flashed upon his mind that
he had forgotten his long knife. He dashed back where he
had lain, but the springy vines were a maze, and though he
knew—maddeningly—that he had to be within arm’s length
of it, no amount of groping and scrabbling enabled him to
lay his hand on it.
As the baying grew steadily louder, his stomach began to
churn. If he didn’t find it, he knew he would get captured
again—or worse. With his hands jerking around
everywhere underfoot, he finally grabbed hold of a rock
about the size of his fist. With a desperate cry, he snatched
it up and bolted into the deep brush.
All that night, like one possessed, he ran deeper and
deeper into the forest—tripping, falling, tangling his feet in
vines, stopping only for moments to catch his breath. But
the hounds kept gaining on him, closer and closer, and
finally, soon after dawn, he could see them over his
shoulder. It was like a nightmare repeating itself. He
couldn’t run any farther. Turning and crouching in a little
clearing with his back against a tree, he was ready for them
—right hand clutching a stout limb he had snapped off
another tree while he was running at top speed, left hand
holding the rock in a grip of death.
The dogs began to lunge toward Kunta, but with a
hideous cry he lashed the club at them so ferociously that
they retreated and cowered just beyond its range, barking
and slavering, until the two toubob appeared on their
horses.
Kunta had never seen these men before. The younger
one drew a gun, but the older one waved him back as he
got down off his horse and walked toward Kunta. He was
calmly uncoiling a long black whip.
Kunta stood there wild-eyed, his body shaking, his brain
flashing a memory of toubob faces in the wood grove, on

the big canoe, in the prison, in the place where he had
been sold, on the heathen farm, in the woods where he had
been caught, beaten, lashed, and shot three times before.
As the toubob’s arm reared backward with the lash,
Kunta’s arm whipped forward with a viciousness that sent
him falling sideways as his fingers released the rock.
He heard the toubob shout; then a bullet cracked past his
ear, and the dogs were upon him. As he rolled over and
over on the ground ripping at the dogs, Kunta glimpsed one
toubob’s face with blood running down it. Kunta was
snarling like a wild animal when they called off the dogs and
approached him with their guns drawn. He knew from their
faces that he would die now, and he didn’t care. One
lunged forward and grabbed him while the other clubbed
with the gun, but it still took all of their strength to hold him,
for he was writhing, fighting, moaning, shrieking in both
Arabic and Mandinka—until they clubbed him again.
Wrestling him violently toward a tree, they tore the clothes
off him and tied him tightly to it around the middle of his
body. He steeled himself to be beaten to death.
But then the bleeding toubob halted abruptly, and a
strange look came onto his face, almost a smile, and he
spoke briefly, hoarsely to the younger one. The younger one
grinned and nodded, then went back to his horse and
unlashed a short-handled hunting ax that had been stowed
against the saddle. He chopped a rotting tree trunk away
from its roots and pulled it over next to Kunta.
Standing before him, the bleeding one began making
gestures. He pointed to Kunta’s genitals, then to the hunting
knife in his belt. Then he pointed to Kunta’s foot, and then to
the ax in his hand. When Kunta understood, he howled and
kicked—and was clubbed again. Deep in his marrow, a
voice shouted that a man, to be a man, must have sons.
And Kunta’s hands flew down to cover his foto. The two
toubob were wickedly grinning.
One pushed the trunk under Kunta’s right foot as the
other tied the foot to the trunk so tightly that all of Kunta’s
raging couldn’t free it. The bleeding toubob picked up the
ax. Kunta was screaming and thrashing as the ax flashed

up, then down so fast—severing skin, tendons, muscles,
bone—that Kunta heard the ax thud into the trunk as the
shock of it sent the agony deep into his brain. As the
explosion of pain bolted through him, Kunta’s upper body
spasmed forward and his hands went flailing downward as
if to save the front half of his foot, which was falling forward,
as bright red blood jetted from the stump as he plunged into
blackness.

CHAPTER 50
For the better part of a day, Kunta lapsed into and out of
consciousness, his eyes closed, the muscles of his face
seeming to sag, with spittle dribbling from a corner of his
open mouth. As he gradually grew aware that he was alive,
the terrible pain seemed to split into parts—pounding within
his head, lancing throughout his body, and searing in his
right leg. When his eyes required too much effort to open,
he tried to remember what had happened. Then it came to
him—the flushed, contorted toubob face behind the ax
flashing upward, the thunk against the stump, the front of
his foot toppling off. Then the throbbing in Kunta’s head
surged so violently that he lapsed mercifully back into
blackness.
The next time he opened his eyes, he found himself
staring at a spider web on the ceiling. After a while, he
managed to stir just enough to realize that his chest, wrists,
and ankles were tied down, but his right foot and the back
of his head were propped against something soft, and he
was wearing some kind of gown. And mingled with his
agony was the smell of something like tar. He had thought
he knew all about suffering before, but this was worse.
He was mumbling to Allah when the door of the hut was
pushed open; he stopped instantly. A tall toubob he had
never seen came in carrying a small black bag. His face
was set in an angry way, though the anger seemed not to
be directed at Kunta. Waving away the buzzing flies, the
toubob bent down alongside him. Kunta could see only his
back; then something the toubob did to his foot brought
such a shock that Kunta shrieked like a woman, rearing
upward against the chest rope. Finally turning around to
face him, the toubob placed his palm against Kunta’s
forehead and then grasped his wrist lightly and held it for a
long moment. Then he stood up, and while he watched the
grimaces on Kunta’s drawn face called out sharply, “Bell!”
A black-skinned woman, short and powerfully built, with a

stern but not forbidding face, soon came inside bringing
water in a tin container. In some peculiar way, Kunta felt that
he recognized her, that in some dream she had been
already there looking down at him and bending beside him
with sips of water. The toubob spoke to her in a gentle way
as he took something from his black bag and stirred it into
a cup of the water. Again the toubob spoke, and now the
black woman kneeled and one of her hands raised the
back of Kunta’s head as the other tilted the cup for him to
drink, which he did, being too sick and weak to resist.
His fleeting downward glance enabled him to catch a
glimpse of the tip of the huge bandaging over his right foot;
it was rust-colored with dried blood. He shuddered, wanting
to spring up, but his muscles felt as useless as the viletasting stuff that he was permitting to go down his throat.
The black woman then eased his head back down, the
toubob said something to her again, and she replied, and
the two of them went out.
Almost before they were gone, Kunta floated off into
deep sleep. When next he opened his eyes late that night,
he couldn’t remember where he was. His right foot felt as if
it were afire; he started to jerk it upward, but the movement
made him cry out. His mind lapsed off into a shadowy blur
of images and thoughts, each of them drifting beyond his
grasp as quickly as they came. Glimpsing Binta, he told her
that he was hurt, but not to worry, for he would be home
again as soon as he was able. Then he saw a family of
birds flying high in the sky and a spear piercing one of
them. He felt himself falling, crying out, desperately
clutching out at nothingness.
When he woke up again, Kunta felt sure that something
terrible had happened to his foot; or had it been a
nightmare? He only knew that he was very sick. His whole
right side felt numb; his throat was dry; his parched lips
were starting to split from fever; he was soaked in sweat,
and it had a sickly smell. Was it possible that anyone would
really chop off another’s foot? Then he remembered that
toubob pointing to his foot and to his genitals, and the
horrible expression on his face. Again the rage flooded up,

and Kunta made an effort to flex his toes. It brought a
blinding sheet of pain. He lay there waiting for it to subside,
but it wouldn’t. And it was unbearable—except that
somehow he was bearing it. He hated himself for wanting
that toubob to come back with more of whatever it was he
put in the water that had given him some ease.
Time and again he tried to pull his hands free of the
loose binding at his sides, but to no avail. He lay there
writhing and groaning in anguish when the door opened
again. It was the black woman, the yellowish light from a
flame flickering on her black face. Smiling, she began
making sounds, facial expressions, and motions that Kunta
knew was an effort to make him understand something.
Pointing toward the hut’s door, she pantomimed a tall man
walking in, then giving something to drink to a moaning
person, who then broadly smiled as if feeling much better.
Kunta made no sign that he understood her meaning that
the tall toubob was a man of medicine.
Shrugging, she squatted down and began pressing a
damp, cooling cloth against Kunta’s forehead. He hated her
no less for it. Then she motioned that she was going to
raise his head for him to sip some of the soup she had
brought. Swallowing it, he felt flashing anger at her pleased
look. Then she made a small hole in the dirt floor into which
she set a round, long, waxy thing and lighted a flame at the
top of it. With gesture and expression, she asked finally if
there was anything else he wanted. He just glowered at her,
and finally, she left.
Kunta stared at the flame, trying to think, until it guttered
out against the dirt. In the darkness, the kill-toubob plotting
in the big canoe came into his mind; he longed to be a
warrior in a great black army slaughtering toubob as fast as
his arms could swing. But then Kunta was shuddering,
fearful that he was dying himself, even though that would
mean he would be forevermore with Allah. After all, none
had ever returned from Allah to tell what it was like with
Him; nor had any ever returned to their villages to tell what it
was like with the toubob.
On Bell’s next visit, she looked down with deep concern

into Kunta’s bloodshot and yellowing eyes, which had
sunken farther into his fevered face. He lay steadily
shuddering, groaning, even thinner than when he had been
brought here the week before. She went back outside, but
within an hour was back with thick cloths, two steaming
pots, and a pair of folded quilts. Moving quickly and—for
some reason—furtively, she covered Kunta’s bared chest
with a thick, steaming poultice of boiled leaves mixed and
mashed with something acrid. The poultice was so
blistering hot that Kunta moaned and tried to shake it off,
but Bell firmly shoved him back. Dipping cloths into her
other steaming pot, she wrung them out and packed them
over the poultice, then covered Kunta with the two quilts.
She sat and watched the sweat pour from him onto the
dirt floor in rivulets. With a corner of her apron, Bell dabbed
at the sweat that trickled into his closed eyes, and finally he
lay entirely limp. Only when she felt the chest cloths and
found them barely warm did she remove them. Then, wiping
his chest clean of all traces of the poultice, she covered him
with the quilts and left.
When he next awakened, Kunta was too weak even to
move his body, which felt about to suffocate under the
heavy quilts. But—without any gratitude—he knew that his
fever was broken.
He lay wondering where that woman had learned to do
what she had done. It was like Binta’s medicines from his
childhood, the herbs of Allah’s earth passed down from the
ancestors. And Kunta’s mind played back to him, as well,
the black woman’s secretive manner, making him realize
that it had not been toubob medicine. Not only was he sure
that the toubob were unaware of it, he knew that the toubob
should never know of it. And Kunta found himself studying
the black woman’s face in his mind. What was it the toubob
had called her? “Bell.”
With reluctance, after a while, Kunta decided that more
than any other tribe, the woman resembled his own. He
tried to picture her in Juffure, pounding her breakfast
couscous, paddling her dugout canoe through the bolong,
bringing in the sheaves of the rice harvest balanced on her

head. But then Kunta reviled himself for the ridiculousness
of thinking of his village in any connection with these pagan,
heathen black ones here in the toubob’s land.
Kunta’s pains had become less constant now, and less
intense; it hurt now mostly when he tried to strain against
the bonds in his desperate achings to move around. But the
flies tormented him badly, buzzing around his bandaged
foot, or what was left of it, and now and then he would jerk
that leg a little to make the flies swarm up awhile before
returning.
Kunta began to wonder where he was. Not only was this
not his own hut, but he could also tell from the sounds
outside, and the voices of black people walking by, that he
had been taken to some new farm. Lying there, he could
smell their cooking and hear their early-night talking and
singing and praying, and the horn blowing in the morning.
And each day the tall toubob came into the hut, always
making Kunta’s foot hurt as he changed the bandage. But
when Bell came three times daily—she brought food and
water, along with a smile and a warm hand on his forehead.
He had to remind himself that these blacks were no better
than the toubob. This black and this toubob may not mean
him any harm—though it was too soon to be sure—but it
was the black Samson who had beaten him almost to
death, and it was toubob who had lashed him and shot him
and cut his foot off. The more he gained in strength, the
deeper grew his rage at having to lie there helpless, unable
even to move anywhere, when for all of his seventeen rains
he had been able to run, bound, and climb anywhere he
wanted to. It was monstrous beyond understanding or
endurance.
When the tall toubob untied Kunta’s wrists from the short
stakes that had held them at his sides, Kunta spent the next
few hours trying futilely to raise his arms; they were too
heavy. Grimly, bitterly, relentlessly, he began forcing
usefulness back into his arms by flexing his fingers over
and over, then making fists—until finally he could raise his
arms. Next he began struggling to pull himself up on his
elbows, and once he succeeded, he spent hours braced

thus staring down at the bandaging over his stump. It
seemed as big as a “punkin,” though it was less bloody
than the previous bandagings he had glimpsed as the
toubob took them off. But when he tried now to raise the
knee of that same leg, he found that he couldn’t yet bear the
pain.
He took out his fury and his humiliation on Bell when she
came to visit him the next time, snarling at her in Mandinka
and banging down the tin cup after he drank. Only later did
he realize that it was the first time since he arrived in
toubob’s land that he had spoken to anyone else aloud. It
made him even more furious to recall that her eyes had
seemed warm despite his show of anger.
One day, after Kunta had been there for nearly three
weeks, the toubob motioned for him to sit up as he began
to unwrap the bandaging. As it came nearer to the foot,
Kunta saw the cloth stickily discolored with a thick,
yellowish matter. Then he had to clamp his jaws as the
toubob removed the final cloth—and Kunta’s senses reeled
when he saw the swollen heel half of his foot covered with a
hideous thick, brownish scab. Kunta almost screamed.
Sprinkling something over the wound, the toubob applied
only a light, loose bandaging over it, then picked up his
black bag and hurriedly left.
For the next two days, Bell repeated what the toubob had
done, speaking softly as Kunta cringed and turned away.
When the toubob returned on the third day, Kunta’s heart
leaped when he saw him carrying two stout straight sticks
with forked tops; Kunta had seen hurt people walk with
them in Juffure. Bracing the stout forks under his arms, the
toubob showed him how to hobble about swinging his right
foot clear of the ground.
Kunta refused to move until they both left. Then he
struggled to pull himself upright, leaning against the wall of
the hut until he could endure the throbbing of his leg without
falling down. Sweat was coursing down his face before he
had maneuvered the forks of the sticks underneath his
armpits. Giddy, wavering, never moving far from the wall for
support, he managed a few awkward, hopping forward

swings of his body, the bandaged stump threatening his
balance with every movement.
When Bell brought his breakfast the next morning,
Kunta’s glance caught the quick pleasure on her face at the
marks made by the ends of the forked sticks in the hard dirt
floor. Kunta frowned at her, angry at himself for not
remembering to wipe away those marks. He refused to
touch the food until the woman left, but then he ate it quickly,
knowing that he wanted its strength now. Within a few days,
he was hobbling freely about within the hut.

CHAPTER 51
In many ways, this toubob farm was very different from the
last one, Kunta began to discover the first time he was able
to get to the hut’s doorway on his crutches and stand
looking around outside. The black people’s low cabins
were all neatly whitewashed, and they seemed to be in far
better condition, as was the one that he was in. It contained
a small, bare table, a wall shelf on which were a tin plate, a
drinking gourd, a “spoon,” and those toubob eating utensils
for which Kunta had finally learned the names: a “fork” and
a “knife”; he thought it stupid for them to let him have such
things within his reach. And his sleeping mat on the floor
had a thicker stuffing of cornshucks. Some of the huts he
saw nearby even had small garden plots behind them, and
the one closest to the toubob’s big house had a colorful,
circular flower patch growing in front of it. From where he
stood in the doorway, Kunta could see anyone walking in
any direction, and whenever he did, he would quickly crutch
back inside and remain there for some time before
venturing back to the doorway.
Kunta’s nose located the outhouse. Each day, he held
back his urges until he knew that most of them were out at
their tasks in the fields, and then—carefully making sure
that no one was nearby—he would go crutching quickly
across the short distance to make use of the place, and
then get safely back.
It was a couple of weeks before Kunta began to make
brief ventures beyond that nearby hut, and the hut of slave
row’s cooking woman, who wasn’t Bell, he was surprised to
discover. As soon as he was well enough to get around,
Bell had stopped bringing him his meals—or even visiting.
He wondered what had become of her—until one day, as
he was standing in his doorway, he caught sight of her
coming out the back door of the big house. But either she
didn’t see him or she pretended not to, as she walked right
past him on her way to the outhouse. So she was just like

the others after all; he had known it all along. Less often,
Kunta caught glimpses of the tall toubob, who was usually
getting into a black-covered buggy that would then go
hurrying away, with its two horses being driven by a black
who sat on a seat up front.
After a few more days, Kunta began to stay outside his
hut even when the field workers returned in the evening,
shambling along in a tired group. Remembering the other
farm he had been on, he wondered why these black ones
weren’t being followed by some toubob with a whip on a
horse. They passed close by Kunta—without seeming to
pay him any attention at all—and disappeared into their
huts. But within a few moments most of them were back
outside again going about their chores. The men did things
around the barn, the women milked cows and fed chickens.
And the children lugged buckets of water and as much
firewood as their arms could carry; they were obviously
unaware that twice as much could be carried if they would
bundle the wood and balance it, or the water buckets, on
their heads.
As the days passed, he began to see that although these
black ones lived better than those on the previous toubob
farm, they seemed to have no more realization than the
others that they were a lost tribe, that any kind of respect or
appreciation for themselves had been squeezed out of
them so thoroughly that they seemed to feel that their lives
were as they should be. All they seemed to be concerned
about was not getting beaten, having enough to eat and
somewhere to sleep. There weren’t many nights that Kunta
finally managed to fall asleep before lying awake burning
with fury at the misery of his people. But they didn’t even
seem to know that they were miserable. So what business
was it of his if these people seemed to be satisfied with
their pathetic lot? He lay feeling as if a little more of him
was dying every day, that while any will to live was left to
him, he should try to escape yet again, whatever the odds
or the consequences. What good was he anymore—alive
or dead? In the twelve moons since he was snatched from
Juffure—how much older than his rains he had become.

It didn’t help matters any that no one seemed to have
found any kind of useful work for Kunta to do, though he
was getting around ably enough on his crutches. He
managed to convey the impression that he was occupied
sufficiently by himself and that he had no need or desire to
associate with anybody. But Kunta sensed that the other
blacks didn’t trust him any more than he trusted them. Alone
in the nights, though, he was so lonely and depressed,
spending hours staring up into the darkness, that he felt as
if he were falling in upon himself. It was like a sickness
spreading within him. He was amazed and ashamed to
realize that he felt the need for love.
Kunta happened to be outside one day when the
toubob’s buggy rolled into the yard with the black driver’s
seat shared by a man of sasso borro color. When the
toubob got out and went into the big house, the buggy
came on nearer the huts and stopped again. Kunta saw the
driver grasp the brown one under his arms to help him
descend, for one of his hands seemed to be encased in
what looked like hardened white mud. Kunta had no idea
what it was, but it seemed likely that the hand was injured in
some way. Reaching back into the buggy with his good
hand, the brown one took out an oddly shaped dark box
and then followed the driver down the row of huts to the one
at the end that Kunta knew was empty.
Kunta was so filled with curiosity that in the morning he
made it his business to hobble down to that hut. He hadn’t
expected to find the brown one seated just inside his
doorway. They simply looked at each other. The man’s face
and eyes were expressionless. And so was his voice when
he said, “What you want?” Kunta had no idea what he was
saying. “You one a dem African niggers.” Kunta recognized
that word he’d heard so often, but not the rest. He just stood
there. “Well, git on, den!” Kunta heard the sharpness,
sensed the dismissal. He all but stumbled, wheeling
around, and went crutching in angry embarrassment back
on up to his own hut.
He grew so furious every time he thought about that
brown one that he wished he knew enough of the toubob

tongue to go and shout, “At least I’m black, not brown like
you!” From that day on, Kunta wouldn’t look in the direction
of that hut whenever he was outside. But he couldn’t quell
his curiosity about the fact that after each evening’s meal,
most of the other blacks hastened to gather at that last hut.
And, listening intently from within his own doorway, Kunta
could hear the voice of the brown one talking almost
steadily. Sometimes the others burst into laughter, and at
intervals he could hear them barraging him with questions.
Who or what was he, Kunta ached to know.
In midafternoon about two weeks later, the brown one
chanced to be emerging from the privy at the very moment
Kunta was approaching it. The brown one’s bulky white arm
covering was gone, and his hands were plaiting two
cornshucks as the furious Kunta rapidly crutched on past.
Sitting inside, Kunta’s head whirled with the insults he
wished he could have expressed. When he came back
outside, the brown one was calmly standing there, his
matter-of-fact expression as if nothing had ever happened
between them. Still twisting and plaiting cornshucks
between his fingers, he beckoned with his head for Kunta
to follow him.
It was so totally unexpected—and disarming—that Kunta
found himself following the brown one back to his cabin
without a word. Obediently, Kunta sat down on the stool the
brown one pointed to and watched as his host seated
himself on the other stool, still plaiting. Kunta wondered if
he knew that he was plaiting much the same as Africans
did.
After a while more of reflective silence, the brown one
began speaking: “I been hearin’ ’bout you so mad. You
lucky dey ain’t kilt you. Dey could of, an’ been inside de law.
Jes’ like when dat white man broke my hand ’cause I got
tired of fiddlin’. Law say anybody catch you ’scapin’ can kill
you and no punishment for him. Dat law gits read out again
eve’y six months in white folks’ churches. Looka here, don’t
start me on white folks’ laws. Startin’ up a new settlement,
dey firs’ builds a courthouse, fo’ passin’ more laws; nex’
build-in’s a church to prove dey’s Christians. I b’lieve all dat

Virginia’s House of Burgess do is pass more laws ’gainst
niggers. It’s a law niggers can’t carry no gun, even no stick
that look like a club. Law say twenty lashes you get caught
widdout a travelin’ pass, ten lashes if’n you looks white
folks in dey eyes, thirty lashes if’n you raises your hand
’gainst a white Christian. Law say no nigger preachin’
lessen a white man dere to listen; law say can’t be no
nigger funeral if dey think it’s a meetin’. Law say cut your
ear off if’n white folks swear you lied, both ears if dey claim
you lied twice. Law say you kill anybody white, you hang; kill
’nother nigger, you jes’ gits whipped. Law say reward a
Indian catchin’ a ’scaped nigger wid all de tobacco dat
Indian can carry. Law ’gainst teachin’ any nigger to read or
write, or givin’ any nigger any book. Dey’s even a law
’gainst niggers beatin’ any drums—any dat African stuff.”
Kunta sensed that the brown one knew he couldn’t
understand, but that he both liked to talk and feel that
Kunta’s listening might somehow bring him at least closer
to comprehension. Looking at the brown one’s face as he
spoke, and listening to his tone, Kunta felt he almost could
understand. And it made him want to both laugh and cry
that someone was actually talking to him as one human
being to another.
“’Bout your foot, looka here, it ain’t jes’ foots and arms
but dicks an’ nuts gits cut off. I seen plenty ruined niggers
like dat still workin’. Seen niggers beat till meat cut off dey
bones. Nigger women’s full of baby gits beat layin’ face
down over a hole dug for dey bellies. Niggers gits scraped
raw, den covered with turpentine or salt, den rubbed wid
straw. Niggers caught talkin’ ’bout revolt made to dance on
hot embers ’til dey falls. Ain’t hardly nothin’ ain’t done to
niggers, an’ if dey die ’cause of it, ain’t no crime long as
dey’s owned by whoever done it, or had it done. Dat’s de
law. An’ if you thinks dat’s bad, you ought to hear what folks
tell gits did to dem niggers dat some slaveboats sells crost
the water on dem West Indies sugar plantations.”
Kunta was still there listening—and trying to understand
—when a first-kafo-sized boy came in with the brown one’s
evening meal. When he saw Kunta there, he dashed out

and soon returned with a covered plate for him, too. Kunta
and the brown one wordlessly ate together, and then Kunta
abruptly rose to leave, knowing that the others would soon
be coming to the hut, but the brown one’s gesture signaled
Kunta to stay.
As the others began arriving a few minutes later, none
were able to mask their surprise at seeing Kunta there—
particularly Bell, who was one of the last to show up. Like
most of the rest, she simply nodded—but with the trace of a
smile, it seemed to Kunta. In the gathering darkness, the
brown one proceeded to hold forth for the group as he had
done for Kunta, who guessed that he was telling them some
kind of stories. Kunta could tell when a story ended, for
abruptly they would all laugh—or ask questions. Now and
then Kunta recognized some of the words that had become
familiar to his ears.
When he went back to his own hut, Kunta was in a turmoil
of emotion about mingling with these black ones. Sleepless
late that night, his mind still tumbling with conflicts, he
recalled something Omoro had said once when Kunta had
refused to let go of a choice mango after Lamin begged for
a bite: “When you clench your fist, no one can put anything
in your hand, nor can your hand pick up anything.”
But he also knew that his father would be in the fullest of
agreement with him that, no matter what, he must never
become anything like these black people. Yet each night,
he felt strangely drawn to go among them at the hut of the
brown one. He resisted the temptation, but almost every
afternoon now, Kunta would hobble over to visit with the
brown one when he was alone.
“Git my fingers back to workin’ right to fiddle again,” he
said while weaving his cornshucks one day. “Any kin’ of
luck, dis massa here go ’head an’ buy me an’ hire me out. I
done fiddled all over Virginia, make good money for him
an’ me both. Ain’t much I ain’t seen an’ done, even if’n you
don’t know what I’m talkin” bout. White folks says all
Africans knows is livin’ in grass huts an’ runnin’’roun’ killin’
an’ eatin’ one ’nother.”
He paused in his monologue, as if expecting some kind

of reaction, but Kunta just sat there watching and listening
impassively and fingering his saphie charm.
“See what I means? You got to put away all dat stuff,”
said the brown one, pointing to the charm. “Give it up. You
ain’t goin’ nowheres, so you might’s well face facks an’
start fittin’ in, Toby, you hear?”
Kunta’s face flashed with anger. “Kunta Kinte!” he
blurted, astonished at himself.
The brown one was equally amazed. “Looka here, he can
talk! But I’m tellin’ you, boy, you got to forgit all dat African
talk. Make white folks mad an’ scare niggers. Yo’ name
Toby. Dey calls me Fiddler.” He pointed to himself. “Say
dat. Fiddler!” Kunta looked at him blankly, though he
understood exactly what he meant. “Fiddler! I’s a fiddler.
Understan’—fiddler?” He made a sawing motion across his
left arm with the other hand. This time Kunta wasn’t
pretending when he looked blank.
Exasperated, the brown one got up and brought from a
corner the oddly shaped box that Kunta had seen him arrive
with. Opening it, he lifted out an even more oddly shaped
light brown wooden thing with a slender black neck and four
taut, thin strings running almost its length. It was the same
musical instrument he had heard the old man play at the
other farm.
“Fiddle!” exclaimed the brown one.
Since they were alone, Kunta decided to say it. He
repeated the sound: “Fiddle.”
Looking pleased, the brown one put the fiddle away and
closed the case. Then, glancing around, he pointed.
“Bucket!” Kunta repeated it, fixing in his head what that
thing was. “Now, water!” Kunta repeated it.
After they had gone through a score or more of new
words, the brown one pointed silently at the fiddle, the
bucket, water, chair, cornshucks, and other objects, his
face a question mark for Kunta to repeat the right word for
all of them. A few of the names he promptly repeated; he
fumbled with a few others and was corrected ; and some
sounds he was unable to say at all. The brown one
refreshed him on those, then reviewed him on them all. “You

ain’t dumb as you looks,” he grunted by suppertime.
The lessons continued through the following days and
stretched into weeks. To Kunta’s astonishment, he began
to discover that he was becoming able not only to
understand but also to make himself understood to the
brown one in a rudimentary way. And the main thing he
wanted him to understand was why he refused to surrender
his name or his heritage, and why he would rather die a
free man on the run than live out his life as a slave. He
didn’t have the words to tell it as he wished, but he knew the
brown one understood, for he frowned and shook his head.
One afternoon not long afterward, arriving at the brown
one’s hut, Kunta found another visitor already there. It was
the old man he’d seen now and then hoeing in the flower
garden near the big house. With a glance at the brown
one’s affirming nod, Kunta sat down.
The old man began to speak. “Fiddler here tell me you
run away four times. You see what it got you. Jes’ hopes
you done learned your lesson like I done. ’Cause you ain’t
done nothin’ new. My young days, I run off so much dey
near ’bout tore my hide off ’fore I got it in my head ain’t
nowhere to run to. Run two states away, dey jes’ tell about it
in dey papers an’ sooner later you gits cotched an’ nearly
kilt, an’ win’ up right back where you come from. Ain’t hardly
nobody ain’t thought about runnin’. De grinnin’est niggers
thinks about it. But ain’t nobody I ever knowed ever got
away. Time you settled down and made de best of things
de way dey is,’stead of wastin’ yo’ young years, like I did,
plottin’ what cain’t be done. I done got ol’ an’ wore out now.
Reckon since you been born I been actin’ like de no-good,
lazy, shiftless, head-scratchin’ nigger white folks says us is.
Only reason massa keep me here, he know I ain’t got no
good auction value, an’ he git more out of me jes’ halfway
doin’ de gardenin’. But I hears tell from Bell massa gwine
put you to workin’ wid me tomorrow.”
Knowing that Kunta had understood hardly any of what
the gardener had said, the fiddler spent the next half hour
explaining what the old man had told him—only slowly and
more simply, in words Kunta was familiar with. He had

mixed feelings about nearly everything the gardener had
said. He understood that the old man meant well by his
advice—and he was beginning to believe that escape was
indeed impossible—but even if he never got away, he
could never pay the price of giving up who and what he had
been born in order to live out his years without another
beating. And the thought of spending them as a crippled
gardener filled him with rage and humiliation. But perhaps
just for a while, until he got his strength back. And it might
be good to get his mind off himself and his hands in the soil
again—even if it wasn’t his own.
The next day, the old gardener showed Kunta what to do.
As he chopped away at the weeds that seemed to spring
up daily among the vegetables, so did Kunta. As he
plucked tomato worms and potato bugs from the plants and
squashed them underfoot, so did Kunta. They got along
well, but apart from working side by side, they didn’t
communicate much, either. Usually the old man would only
make grunts and gestures whenever Kunta needed to be
shown how to do some new task, and Kunta, without
responding, simply did as he was told. He didn’t mind the
silence; as a matter of fact, his ears needed a few hours’
rest each day between conversations with the fiddler, who
ran his mouth every minute they were together.
That night after the evening meal, Kunta was sitting in the
doorway of his hut when the man called Gildon—who made
the horse and mule collars and also shod the black people
—walked up to him and held out a pair of shoes. At the
orders of the “massa,” he said he had made them
especially for Kunta. Taking them and nodding his thanks,
Kunta turned them over and over in his hands before
deciding to try them on. It felt strange to have such things on
his feet, but they fit perfectly—even though the front half of
the right shoe was stuffed with cotton. The shoemaker bent
down to tie the lacings, then suggested that Kunta get up
and walk around in them to see how they felt. The left shoe
was fine, but he felt tiny stinging sensations in his right foot
as he walked awkwardly and gingerly around outside his
hut without the crutches. Seeing his discomfort, the

shoemaker said that was because of the stump, not the
shoe, and he would get used to it.
Later that day, Kunta walked a bit farther, testing, but the
right foot was still uncomfortable, so he removed a little of
the cotton stuffing and put it back on. It felt better, and finally
he dared to put his full weight on that foot, and there wasn’t
any undue pain. Every now and then he would continue to
experience the phantom pain of his right toes aching, as he
had nearly every day since he started walking around, and
he would glance downward—always with surprise—to find
that he didn’t have any. But he kept practicing walking
around, and feeling better than he let his face show; he had
been afraid that he would always have to walk with
crutches.
That same week the massa’s buggy returned from a trip,
and the black driver, Luther, hurried to Kunta’s hut,
beckoning him down to the fiddler’s, where Kunta watched
him say something, grinning broadly. Then with gestures
toward the big house and with selected key words, the
fiddler made Kunta nod in understanding that Massa
William Waller, the toubob who lived in the big house, now
owned Kunta. “Luther say he just got a deed to you from his
brother who had you at first, so you his now.” As usual,
Kunta did not let his face show his feelings. He was angry
and ashamed that anyone could “own” him, but he was also
deeply relieved, for he had feared that one day he would be
taken back to that other “plantation,” as he now knew the
toubob farms were called. The fiddler waited until Luther
had left before he spoke again—partly to Kunta and partly
to himself. “Niggers here say Massa William a good
master, an’ I seen worse. But ain’t none of’em no good.
Dey all lives off us niggers. Niggers is the biggest thing dey
got.”

CHAPTER 52
Almost every day now, when work was done, Kunta would
return to his hut and after his evening prayer would scratch
up the dirt in a littler square on his floor and draw Arabic
characters in it with a stick, then sit looking for a long time
at what he had written, often until supper. Then he would rub
out what he had written, and it would be time to go down
and sit among the others as the fiddler talked. Somehow
his praying and his studying made it all right to mix with
them. That way, it seemed to him he could remain himself
without having to remain by himself. Anyway, if they had
been in Africa, there would have been someone like the
fiddler to go to, only he would have been a wandering
musician and griot traveling from one village to the next and
singing as he played his kora or his balafon in between the
telling of fascinating stories drawn from his adventures.
Just as it had been done in Africa, Kunta had also begun
to keep track of the passing of time by dropping a small
pebble into a gourd on the morning after each new moon.
First he had dropped into the gourd 12 rounded,
multicolored stones for the 12 moons he guessed he’d
spent on the first toubob farm; then he had dropped in six
more for the time he’d been here on this new farm; and then
he had carefully counted out 204 stones for the 17 rains
he’d reached when he was taken from Juffure, and dropped
them into the gourd. Adding them all up, he figured that he
was now into his nineteenth rain.
So as old as he felt, he was still a young man. Would he
spend the rest of his life here, as the gardener had,
watching hope and pride slip away along with the years,
until there was nothing left to live for and time had finally run
out? The thought filled him with dread—and determination
not to end up the way the old man had, doddering around in
his plot, uncertain which foot to put before the other. The
poor man was worn out long before the midday meal, and
through the afternoons he was only able to pretend that he

was working at all, and Kunta had to shoulder almost all the
load.
Every morning, as Kunta bent over his rows, Bell would
come with her basket—Kunta had learned that she was the
cook in the big house—to pick the vegetables she wanted
to fix for the massa that day. But the whole time she was
there, she never so much as looked at Kunta, even when
she walked right past him. It puzzled and irritated him,
remembering how she had attended him daily when he lay
fighting to survive, and how she would nod at him during the
evenings at the fiddler’s. He decided that he hated her, that
the only reason she had acted as his nurse back then was
because the massa had ordered her to do it. Kunta wished
that he could hear whatever the fiddler might have to say
about this matter, but he knew that his limited command of
words wouldn’t allow him to express it right—apart from the
fact that even asking would be too embarrassing.
One morning not long afterward, the old man didn’t come
to the garden, and Kunta guessed that he must be sick. He
had seemed even more feeble than usual for the past few
days. Rather than going right away to the old man’s hut to
check on him, Kunta went straight to work watering and
weeding, for he knew that Bell was due at any moment, and
he didn’t think it would be fitting for her to find no one there
when she arrived.
A few minutes later she showed up and, still without
looking at Kunta, went about her business, filling her basket
with vegetables as Kunta stood holding his hoe and
watching her. Then, as she started to leave, Bell hesitated,
looked around, set the basket on the ground, and—
throwing a quick, hard glance at Kunta—marched off. Her
message was clear that he should bring her basket to the
back door of the big house, as the old man had always
done. Kunta all but exploded with rage, his mind flashing an
image of dozens of Juffure women bearing their headloads
in a line past the bantaba tree where Juffure’s men always
rested. Slamming down his hoe, he was about to stamp
away when he remembered how close she was to the
massa. Gritting his teeth, he bent over, seized the basket,

and followed silently after Bell. At the door, she turned
around and took the basket as if she didn’t even see him.
He returned to the garden seething.
From that day on, Kunta more or less became the
gardener. The old man, who was very sick, came only now
and then, whenever he was strong enough to walk. He
would do a little something for as long as he felt able, which
wasn’t very long, and then hobble back to his hut. He
reminded Kunta of the old people back in Juffure who,
ashamed of their weakness, continued to totter about
making the motions of working until they were forced to
retreat to their pallets, and finally were rarely seen out any
more at all.
The only new duty Kunta really hated was having to carry
that basket for Bell every day. Muttering under his breath,
he would follow her to the door, thrust it into her hands as
rudely as he dared, then turn on his heel and march back to
work, as fast as he could go. As much as he detested her,
though, his mouth would water when now and then the air
would waft to the garden the tantalizing smells of the things
that Bell was cooking.
He had dropped the twenty-second pebble into his
calendar gourd when—without any outward sign of change
—Bell beckoned him on into the house one morning. After
a moment’s hesitation, he followed her inside and set the
basket on a table there. Trying not to look amazed at the
strange things he saw everywhere around him in this room,
which they called the “kitchen,” he was turning to leave
when she touched him on the arm and handed him a biscuit
with what looked like a piece of cold beef between the
slices. As he stared at it in puzzlement, she said, “Ain’t you
never seed a san’wich befo’? It ain’t gonna bite you. You
s’posed to bite it. Now git on outa here.”
As time went on, Bell began to give him more than he
could carry in his hand—usually a tin plate piled with
something called “cornpone,” a kind of bread he had never
tasted before, along with boiled fresh mustard greens in
their own delicious potliquor. He had sown the mustard’s
tiny seeds himself—in garden soil mixed with rich black dirt

dug from the cow pasture—and the tender greens had
swiftly, luxuriously sprung up. He loved no less the way she
cooked the long, slender field peas that grew on the vines
coiling around the sweet corn’s stalks. She never gave him
any obvious meat of the pig, though he wasn’t sure how she
knew that. But whatever she gave him, he would always
wipe off the plate carefully with a rag before returning it.
Most often he would find her at her “stove”—a thing of iron
that contained fire—but sometimes she would be on her
knees scrubbing the kitchen floor with oak ashes and a
hard-bristled brush. Though at times he wanted to say
something to her, he could never muster a better
expression of his appreciation than a grunt—which now she
returned.
One Sunday after supper, Kunta had gotten up to stretch
his legs and was walking around the fiddler’s hut idly
patting himself on the belly when the brown one, who had
been talking steadily all through the meal, interrupted his
monologue to exclaim, “Looka here, you startin’ to fill out!”
He was right. Kunta hadn’t looked—or felt—better since he
left Juffure.
After months of incessant plaiting to strengthen his
fingers, the fiddler, too, felt better than he had in a long time
—since his hand was broken—and in the evenings he had
begun to play on his instrument again. Holding the peculiar
thing in his cupped hand and under his chin, the fiddler
raked its strings with his wand—which seemed to be made
of long, fine hairs—and the usual evening audience would
shout and break into applause when each song had
finished. “Dat ain’t nothin’!” he would say disgustedly.
“Fingers ain’t nimble yet.”
Later, when they were alone, Kunta asked haltingly,
“What is nimble?”
The fiddler flexed and wiggled his fingers. “Nimble!
Nimble. Get it?” Kunta nodded.
“You a lucky nigger, what you is,” the fiddler went on.
“Jes’ piddlin’’roun’ eve’yday in dat garden. Ain’t hardly
nobody got a job dat sof ’ ’cept on plantations whole lot
bigger’n dis.”

Kunta thought he understood, and he didn’t like it. “Work

hard,” he said. And nodding at the fiddler on his chair, he
added, “Harder dan dat.”
The fiddler grinned. “You awright, African!”

CHAPTER 53
The “months,” as they called moons here, were passing
more quickly now, and before long the hot season known
as “summer” was over and harvest time had begun along
with a great many more duties for Kunta and the others.
While the rest of the blacks—even Bell—were busy with the
heavy work out in the fields, he was expected to tend the
chickens, the livestock, and the pigs in addition to his
garden. And at the height of the cotton picking, he was
called upon to drive the wagon along the rows. Except for
having to feed the filthy swine, which almost made him ill,
Kunta didn’t mind the extra work, for it made him feel less
of a cripple. But it was seldom that he got back to his hut
before dark—so tired out that he sometimes even forgot to
eat his supper. Taking off nothing but his frayed straw hat
and his shoes—to relieve the aching of his half foot—he
would flop down on his cornshuck mattress, pulling his quilt
of cotton-stuffed burlap up over him, and within moments he
would be sound asleep, in clothes still wet with sweat.
Soon the wagons were piled high with cotton, then with
plump ears of corn, and the golden tobacco leaves were
hanging up to dry. The hogs had been killed, cut into
pieces, and hung over slowly burning hickory, and the
smoky air was turning cold when everyone on the plantation
began preparing for the “harvest dance,” an occasion so
important that even the massa would be there. Such was
their excitement that when Kunta found out that the black
people’s Allah didn’t seem to be involved, he decided to
attend himself—but just to watch.
By the time he got up the courage to join the party, it was
well under way. The fiddler, whose fingers were finally
nimble again, was sawing away at his strings, and another
man was clacking two beef bones together to keep time as
someone shouted, “Cakewalk!” Dancers coupled off and
hurried out before the fiddler. Each woman put her foot on
the man’s knee while he tied her shoestring; then the fiddler

sang out, “Change partners!” and when they did, he began
to play madly, and Kunta saw that the dancers’ footsteps
and body motions were imitating their planting of the crops,
the chopping of wood, the picking of cotton, the swinging of
scythes, the pulling of corn, the pitchforking of hay into
wagons. It was all so much like the harvest dancing back in
Juffure that Kunta’s good foot was soon tapping away on
the ground—until he realized what he was doing and
looked around, embarrassed, to see if anyone had noticed.
But no one had. At that moment, in fact, almost everyone
had begun to watch a slender fourth-kafo girl who was
dipping and whirling around as light as a feather, her head
tossing, her eyes rolling, her arms describing graceful
patterns. Soon the other dancers, exhausted, were moving
to the sides to catch their breaths and stare; even her
partner was hard put to keep up.
When he quit, gasping, a shout went up, and when finally
even she went stumbling toward the sidelines, a whooping
and hollering engulfed her. The cheering got even louder
when Massa Waller awarded that girl a half-dollar prize.
And smiling broadly at the fiddler, who grinned and bowed
in return, the massa left them amid more shouting. But the
cakewalk was far from over, and the other couples, rested
by now, rushed back out and went on as before, seemingly
ready to dance all night.
Kunta was lying on his mattress thinking about what he
had heard and seen when suddenly there came a rapping
at his door.
“Who dat?” he demanded, astonished, for only twice had
anyone ever come to his hut in all the time he’d lived there.
“Kick dis do’ in, nigger!”
Kunta opened the door, for it was the voice of the fiddler;
instantly he smelled the liquor on his breath. Though he was
repelled, Kunta said nothing, for the fiddler was bursting to
talk, and it would have been unkind to turn him away just
because he was drunk.
“You seen massa!” said the fiddler. “He ain’t knowed I
could play dat good! Now you watch an’ see if ’n he don’t
’range for me to play for white folks to hear me, an’ den hire

me out!” Beside himself with happiness, the fiddler sat on
Kunta’s three-legged stool, fiddle across his lap, and went
on babbling.
“Looka here, I second fiddled with the best! You ever
hear of Sy Gilliat from Richmond?” He hesitated. “Naw,
’course you ain’t! Well, dat’s de fiddlin’est slave nigger in
de worl’, and I fiddled wid him. Looka here, he play for
nothin’ but big white folks’ balls an’ dances, I mean like the
Hoss Racin’ Ball every year, and like dat. You oughta see
him wid dat gold-painted fiddle of his an’ him wearin’ court
dress wid his brown wig an’ Lawd, dem manners! Nigger
name London Briggs behin’ us playin’ flute an’ clarinet! De
minuets, de reels, de congos, hornpipes, jigs, even jes’
caperin’’bout—don’t care what it was, we’d have dem white
folks dancin’ up a storm!”
The fiddler carried on like this for the next hour—until the
alcohol wore off—telling Kunta of the famous singing slaves
who worked in Richmond’s tobacco factories; of other
widely known slave musicians who played the
“harpsichord,” the “pianoforte,” and the “violin”—whatever
they were—who had learned to play by listening to toubob
musicians from someplace called “Europe,” who had been
hired to come to plantations to teach the massas’ children.
The following crispy cold morning saw the starting of new
tasks. Kunta watched as the women mixed hot melted
tallow with wood-ash lye and water, boiling and stirring,
then cooling the thick brown mixture in wooden trays to let it
set for four nights and three days before they cut it into
oblong cakes of hard, brown soap. To his complete
distaste, he saw men fermenting apples, peaches, and
persimmons into something foul-smelling that they called
“brandy,” which they put into bottles and barrels. Others
mixed gluey red clay, water, and dried hog hair to press
into cracks that had appeared in their huts. Women stuffed
some mattresses with cornshucks like Kunta’s, and some
others with the moss he had seen drying; and a new
mattress for the massa was filled with goose feathers.
The slave who built things from wood was making new
tubs in which clothes would be soaked in soapy water

before being boiled and lumped onto a wooden block to be
beaten with a stick. The man who made things with leather
—horse collars, harnesses, and shoes—was now busily
tanning cows’ hides. And women were dyeing into different
colors the white cotton cloth the massa had bought to make
clothes with. And just as it was in Juffure, all of the nearby
vines, bushes, and fences were draped with drying cloths of
red, yellow, and blue.
With each passing day, the air became colder and
colder, the sky grayer and grayer, until soon the ground was
covered once again with snow and ice that Kunta found as
unpleasant as it was extraordinary. And before long the
other blacks were beginning to talk with great excitement
about “Christmas,” which he had heard of before. It seemed
to have to do with singing, dancing, eating, and the giving
of gifts, which sounded fine—but it also seemed to involve
their Allah, so even though Kunta really enjoyed by now the
gatherings at the fiddler’s, he decided it would be best to
stay to himself until the pagan festivities were safely over.
He didn’t even visit the fiddler, who looked curiously at
Kunta the next time he saw him, but said nothing about it.
Thence swiftly came another springtime season, and as
he knelt planting among his rows, Kunta remembered how
lush the fields around Juffure always looked at this time of
year. And he recalled as a second-kafo boy how happily he
had gone prancing out behind the hungry goats in this
green season. Here in this place the black “young’uns”
were helping to chase and catch the baaaing, bounding
“sheep,” as the animals were called, and then fighting over
whose turn was next to sit on the head of a desperately
struggling sheep while a man snipped off the thick, dirty
wool with a pair of shears. The fiddler explained to Kunta
that the wool would be taken off somewhere to be cleaned
and “carded into bats,” which then would be returned for the
women to spin woolen thread from which they would weave
cloth for the making of winter clothes.
The garden’s plowing, planting, and cultivating went by
for Kunta in a sweating blur of dawns to darks. Early in the
midsummer month they called “July,” those who worked out

in the fields would return exhausted to their huts every night
as they pressed to complete the last hoeing of grass from
around the waist-high cotton and corn that was heavy with
tasseled heads. It was hard work, but at least there was
plenty to eat in the storehouses that had been filled to
overflowing the past fall. At this time in Juffure, Kunta
thought, the people’s stomachs would be aching as they
made soup from roots, grubworms, grass, and anything
else they could find, because the crops and fruits so lushly
green were not yet ripe.
The “laying by” had to be finished before the second
“Sunday” in July, Kunta learned, when the blacks from most
of the plantations in this area—which was called
“Spotsylvania County”—would be permitted to travel
someplace to join in some kind of “camp meetin’.” Since,
whatever it was, it had to do with their Allah, no one even
suggested that Kunta go along with the more than twenty of
them who left very early that Sunday morning, packed into a
wagon whose use Massa Waller had approved.
Nearly everyone was gone for the next few days—so
many that few would have been there to notice if Kunta had
tried to run away again—but he knew that even though he
had learned to get around all right and make himself fairly
useful, he would never be able to get very far before some
slave catcher caught up with him again. Though it shamed
him to admit it, he had begun to prefer life as he was
allowed to live it here on this plantation to the certainty of
being captured and probably killed if he tried to escape
again. Deep in his heart, he knew he would never see his
home again, and he could feel something precious and
irretrievable dying inside of him forever. But hope remained
alive; though he might never see his family again, perhaps
someday he might be able to have one of his own.

CHAPTER 54
Another year had passed—so fast that Kunta could hardly
believe it—and the stones in his gourd told him that he had
reached his twentieth rain. It was cold again, and
“Christmas” was once more in the air. Though he felt the
same as he always had about the black ones’ Allah, they
were having such a good time that he began to feel his own
Allah would have no objection to his merely observing the
activities that went on during this festive season.
Two of the men, having received week-long traveling
passes from Massa Waller, were packing to go and visit
their mates living on other plantations; one of the men was
going to see a new baby for the first time. But every hut
except theirs—and Kunta’s—was busy with some kind of
preparations, chiefly the fixing up of party clothes with lace
and beads, and the taking of nuts and apples from their
storage places.
And up in the big house, all of Bell’s pots and pans were
bubbling with yams and rabbits and roast pig—and many
dishes made from animals Kunta had never seen or heard
of until he came to this country: turkey, ’coons, ’possums,
and the like. Though he was hesitant at first, the succulent
smells from her kitchen soon persuaded Kunta to try
everything—except for pig, of course. Nor was he
interested in sampling the liquor Massa Waller had
promised for the black ones: two barrels of hard cider, one
of wine, and a keg of whiskey he had brought in his buggy
from somewhere else.
Kunta could tell that some of the liquor was being quietly
consumed in advance, no little of it by the fiddler. And along
with the drinkers’ antics, the black children were running
around holding dried hog bladders on sticks closer and
closer to fires until each one burst with a loud bang amid
general laughing and shouting. He thought it was all
unbelievably stupid and disgusting.
When the day finally came, the drinking and eating began

in earnest. From the door of his hut, Kunta watched as
guests of Massa Waller’s arrived for the midday feast, and
afterward as the slaves assembled close by the big house
and began to sing, led by Bell, he saw the massa raise the
window, smiling; then he and the other white folks came
outside and stood listening, seeming to be enthralled. After
that the massa sent Bell to tell the fiddler to come and play
for them, which he did.
Kunta could understand their having to do what they were
told, but why did they seem to enjoy it so much? And if the
whites were so fond of their slaves that they gave them
presents, why didn’t they make them really happy and set
them free? But he wondered if some of these blacks, like
pets, would be able to survive, as he could, unless they
were taken care of.
But was he any better than they were? Was he all that
different? Slowly but surely, he couldn’t deny that he was
easing into acceptance of their ways. He was most
troubled about his deepening friendship with the fiddler. His
drinking of liquor deeply offended Kunta, and yet had not a
pagan the right to be a pagan? The fiddler’s boastfulness
also bothered Kunta, yet he believed that all the fiddler had
boasted of was true. But the fiddler’s crude and irreverent
sense of humor was distasteful to him; and Kunta had
come to dislike intensely hearing the fiddler call him
“nigger,” since he had learned that it was the white man’s
name for blacks. But had it not been the fiddler who had
taken it upon himself to teach him to talk? Was it not he
whose friendship had made it easier for him to feel less of
a stranger with the other blacks? Kunta decided that he
wanted to know the fiddler better.
Whenever the proper time came, in the best roundabout
way he could, he would ask the fiddler about some of the
questions that were in his mind. But two more pebbles had
been dropped into his gourd before one quiet Sunday
afternoon, when no one was working, he went down to the
familiar last hut on slave row, and found the fiddler in a rare
quiet mood.
After exchanging greetings, they were both silent for a

time. Then, just to make conversation, Kunta said he had
overheard the massa’s driver, Luther, say that white folks
were talking about “taxes” wherever he drove the massa.
What were taxes, anyway, he wanted to know.
“Taxes is money got to be paid extry on near ’bout
anything white folks buys,” replied the fiddler. “Dat king
’crost de water puts on de taxes to keep him rich.”
It was so unlike the fiddler to be so brief that Kunta
figured he must be in a bad mood. Discouraged, he sat
there for a while in silence, but finally he decided to spit out
what was really on his mind: “Where you was fo’ here?”
The fiddler stared at him for a long, tense moment. Then
he spoke, his voice cutting. “I know every nigger here
figgerin’ ’bout me! Wouldn’t tell nobody else nothin’! But
you diff ’rent.”
He glared at Kunta. “You know how come you diff ’rent?
’Cause you don’t know nothin’! You done got snatched over
here, an’ got your foot cut, you thinks you been through all
dey is! Well, you ain’t de only one had it bad.” His voice
was angry. “You ever tells what I’m gonna tell you, I’ll catch
you upside de head!”
“I ain’t!” Kunta declared.
The fiddler leaned forward and spoke softly so as not to
be overheard. “Massa I had in No’th Ca’lina got drowned.
Ain’t nobody’s bidness how. Anyway, same night I lit out,
an’ he ain’t had no wife or young’uns to claim me. I hid out
with Injuns ’til I figured it was safe to leave an’ git here to
Virginia an’ keep on fiddlin’.”
“What ‘Virginia’?” asked Kunta.
“Man, you really don’t know nothin’, does you? Virginia’s
the colony you livin’ in, if you want to call dis livin’.”
“What’s a colony?”
“You even dumber’n you look. Dey’s thirteen colonies
that go to make up this country. Down south of here there’s
the Ca’linas, and up north they’s Maryland, Pennsylvania,
New York, and a bunch of others. I ain’t never been up dere,
an’ neither has most niggers. I hear tell lotta white folks up
dere don’t hold with slavery and sets us folk free. Myself, I’m
kind of a half-free nigger. I have to be roun’ some massa

’case pattyrollers ever catches me.” Kunta didn’t
understand, but he acted as if he did, since he didn’t feel
like getting insulted again.
“You ever seen Injuns?” the fiddler demanded.
Kunta hesitated. “I seen some.”
“Dey was here ’fo’ white folks. White folks tell you one of
dem name Columbus discover dis place. But if he foun’
Injuns here, he ain’t discover it, is he?” The fiddler was
warming to his subject.
“White man figger whoever somewhere ’fore him don’t
count. He call dem savages.”
The fiddler paused to appreciate his wit, and then went
on. “You ever seen Injuns’ teepees?” Kunta shook his head
no. The fiddler enclosed three of his spread fingers within a
small rag. “De fingers is poles an’ de rag is hides. Dey
lives inside dat.”
He smiled. “Bein’ from Africa, you prob’ly thinks you
knows all dey is ’bout huntin’ and like that, but ain’t nobody
hunts or travels good as Injuns. Once one go somewhere
it’s a map in his head how he went. But Injun mammies—
dey calls ’em squaws—carries dey young’uns on dey
backs, like I hears y’all’s mammies does in Africa.”
Kunta was surprised that the fiddler knew that, and
couldn’t help showing it. The fiddler smiled again and
continued the lesson. “Some Injuns hates niggers, an’ some
likes us. Niggers an’ lan’ is Injuns’ big troubles with white
folks. White folks wants all the Injuns’ land and hates Injuns
what hides niggers!” The fiddler’s eyes searched Kunta’s
face. “Tall Africans and Injuns made de same mistake—
lettin’ white folks into where you live. You offered him to eat
and sleep, then first thing you know he kickin’ you out or
lockin’ you up!”
The fiddler paused again. Then suddenly he burst out:
“What put me out with you African niggers, looka here! I
knowed five or six ack like you! Don’t know how come I
took up wid you in de firs’ place! You git over here figgerin’
niggers here ought to be like you is! How you ’spec we gon’
know ’bout Africa? We ain’t never been dere, an’ ain’t goin’
neither!” Glaring at Kunta, he lapsed into silence.

And fearful of provoking another outburst, Kunta soon left
without another word, rocked onto his heels by what the
fiddler had said to him. But the more he thought about it
back in his hut, the better he felt about it. The fiddler had
taken off his mask; that meant he was beginning to trust
Kunta. For the first time in his acquaintance with anyone in
the three rains since he had been stolen from his
homeland, Kunta was actually beginning to know someone.

CHAPTER 55
Over the next several days, as he worked in the garden,
Kunta thought a great deal about how long it had taken him
to realize how little he really knew about the fiddler, and
about how much more there was to know about him. Almost
certainly he reflected no less of a mask was still being worn
for him by the old gardener, whom Kunta had been going to
visit now and then. And he didn’t know Bell much better,
though he and she had some daily exchange of talk—or
rather Kunta mostly listened while he ate whatever food she
gave him, but it was always about small and impersonal
matters. It occurred to him how both Bell and the gardener
had sometimes started to say something, or hinted at
something, but then never finished. They were both
cautious people in general, but it seemed they were
especially so with him. He decided to get to know them
both better. On his next visit to the old gardener, Kunta
began in his indirect Mandinka way by asking about
something the fiddler had told him. Kunta said he had
heard about “pattyrollers,” but he was uncertain who or what
they were.
“Dey’s low-down po’ white trash dat ain’t never owned a
nigger in dey lives!” the old gardener said heatedly. “It’s a
ol’ Virginia law to patrol de roads, or anywhere else niggers
is, an’ whip an’ jail any of’em gits cotched widdout a writout pass from dey massa. An’ who gits hired to do it is dem
po’ whites what jes’ loves cotchin’ an’ beatin’ somebody
else’s niggers ’cause dey ain’t got none. What’s behind it,
y’understan’, all white folks scared to death dat any loose
nigger is plannin’ a re-volt. Fact, ain’t nothin’ pattyrollers
loves more’n claimin’ to suspicion some nigger, an’ bustin’
in an’ strippin’ him buck naked right before his wife an’
young’uns an’ beatin’ him bloody.”
Seeing Kunta’s interest, and pleased by his visit, the old
gardener went on: “Massa we got don’t ’prove a dat. It’s
how come he don’t have no oberseer. He say he don’t want

nobody beatin’ his niggers. He tell his niggers to obersee
deyselves, jes’ do de work like dey know to, an’ don’t never
break none a his rules. He swear sun won’t set here on no
nigger break his rules.”
Kunta wondered what the rules were, but the gardener
kept on talking. “Reason massa like he is ’cause he of a
family was rich even ’fore dey come here from dat England
’crost de water. Dem Wallers always been what most
massas jes’ tries to act like dey is.’Cause most of dese
massas ain’t nothin’ but coonhunters what got hole of a
piece of lan’ an’ one or two niggers dey worked half to
death, an’ jes’ kep’ on growin’ from dat.
“Ain’t many plantations got a whole lot of slaves. Mos’ of
’em jes’ maybe anywhere from one to five or six niggers.
Us twenty here make dis one pretty big. Two out of every
three white folks ain’t got no slaves at all, dat’s what I
heared. Real big plantations with fifty or a hunnud slaves is
mostly where de black dirt is; dem river bottoms like in
Lousiana, Miss’ippi, an’ Alabama got some, too; an’ dem
coasts a Geo’gia an’ South Ca’lina where dey grows rice.”
“How ol’ you?” Kunta asked abruptly.
The gardener looked at him. “Older’n you or anybody
else thinks I is.” He sat as if musing for a moment. “I heared
the Indians’ war whoopin’ when I was a chile.”
After a silent moment with his head down, he glanced up
at Kunta and began singing, “Ah yah, tair umbam,
boowah—” Kunta sat astounded. “Kee lay zee day nic
olay, man lun dee nic o lay ah wah nee —” Stopping, the
old man said, “My mammy used to sing dat. Say she got it
from her mammy, who come from Africa, same as you did.
You know by dem sounds where she come from?”
“Soun’ like Serere tribe,” said Kunta. “But I don’t know
dem words. I heared Serere spoke on the boat what brung
me.”
The old gardener looked furtively around. “Gon’ shut up
wid dat singin’. Some nigger hear it an’ tell massa. White
folks don’ want no niggers talkin’ no African.”
Kunta had been about to say that there was no question
the old man was a fellow Gambian; of Jolof blood, with their

high noses and flat lips and skins even deeper black than
most other Gambian tribes. But when the gardener said
what he said, he decided it was better not to speak of such
things. So he changed the subject, asking where the old
man was from and how he had ended up on this plantation.
The gardener didn’t answer right away. But finally, he said,
“Nigger suffered a lot like I is learn a lot,” and he looked
carefully at Kunta, appearing to be deciding whether or not
to go on. “I were a good man once. I could ben’ a crowbar
over my leg. I could lif’ a sack of meal dat would fell a mule.
Or I could lif’ a grown man by he belt wif my arm straight
out. But I got worked an’ beat near ’bout to death ’fo’ my
massa what done it sign me over to dis massa to pay a
bill.” He paused. “Now I done got enfeebled, I jes’ wants to
res’ out whatever time I got lef.”
His eyes searched Kunta. “Sho’ don’ know how come I’m
tellin’ you dis. I ain’t really bad off as I ack. But massa won’t
sell me long as he think I’m bad off. I seen you caught on
how to garden some, though.” He hesitated. “I could git
back out dere an he’p if’n you wants me to—but not too
much. I jes’ ain’t much good no mo’,” he said sadly.
Kunta thanked the old man for offering, but reassured
him that he’d be able to get along fine. A few minutes later
he excused himself, and on his way back to his hut, got
angry with himself for not feeling more compassion toward
the old man. He was sorry he had been through so much,
but he couldn’t help turning a cold ear toward anyone who
just rolled over and gave up.
The very next day, Kunta decided to see if he could get
Bell talking too. Since he knew that Massa Waller was her
favorite subject, he began by asking why he wasn’t married.
“Him sho’ was married—him an’ Miss Priscilla, same year I
come here. She was pretty as a hummin’bird. Wasn’t hardly
no bigger’n one, neither. Dat’s how come she died birthin’
dey first baby. Was a little gal; it died, too. Terriblest time I
guess anybody ever seen ’roun’ here. An’ massa ain’t
never been the same man since. Jes’ work, work, work,
seem like sometime he tryin’ to kill hisself. He cain’t bear to
think a nobody sick or hurt he can he’p. Massa would

doctor a sick cat quick as he would some hurt nigger he
hear’bout, like dat fiddler you always talkin’ to—or like when
you was brung here. He got so mad ’bout how dey done
your foot, he even bought you away from his own brother
John. ’Co’se wunt his doin’, it was dem po’ cracker nigger
catchers he hired, who say you tried to kill ’em.”
Kunta listened, realizing that just as he was only
beginning to appreciate the individual depths and
dimensions of the black ones, it had never occurred to him
that even white folks could also have human sufferings,
though their ways in general could never be forgiven. He
found himself wishing that he could speak the white folks’
tongue well enough to say all this to Bell—and to tell her the
story his old grandmother Nyo Boto had told him about the
boy who tried to help the trapped crocodile, the story Nyo
Boto always ended with, “In the world, the payment for good
is often bad.”
Thinking of home reminded Kunta of something he’d
been wanting to tell Bell for a long time, and this seemed
like a good moment. Except for her brown color, he told her
proudly, she looked almost like a handsome Mandinka
woman.
He didn’t have long to wait for her response to this great
compliment. “What fool stuff you talkin’ ’bout?” she said
irately. “Don’ know how come white folks keep on emptyin’
out boatloads a you Africa niggers!”

CHAPTER 56
For the next month, Bell wouldn’t speak to Kunta—and even
carried her own basket back to the big house after she had
come for the vegetables. Then, early one Monday morning,
she came rushing out to the garden, eyes wide with
excitement, and blurted, “Sheriff jes’ rid off! He tol’ massa
been some big fightin’ up Nawth somewhere call Boston!
It’s dem white folks so mad’bout dem king’s taxes from
’crost de big water. Massa got Luther hitchin’ de buggy to
git to de county seat. He sho’ upset!”
Suppertime found everyone clustered around the
fiddler’s hut for his and the gardener’s opinions, the
gardener being slave row’s oldest person, the fiddler its
best traveled and most worldly.
“When it was?” somebody asked, and the gardener said,
“Well, anything we hears from up Nawth got to of happened
a while back.”
The fiddler added, “I heared dat from up roun’ where dat
Boston is, ten days is de quickest dat fast hosses can git
word here to Virginia.”
In the deepening dusk, the massa’s buggy returned.
Luther hurried to slave row with further details he had
picked up: “Dey’s tellin’ it dat one night some a dem
Boston peoples got so mad’bout dem king’s taxes dey
marched on dat king’s soldiers. Dem soldiers commence
to shootin’, an’ firs’ one kilt was a nigger name a Crispus
Attucks. Dey callin’ it ’De Boston Massacree’!”
Little else was talked of for the next few days, as Kunta
listened, unsure what it was all about and why white folks—
and even the blacks—were so agog about whatever was
happening so far away. Hardly a day passed without two or
three passing slaves “Yooohooo-ah-hoooing” from the big
road with a new rumor. And Luther kept bringing regular
reports from house slaves, stable-hands, and other drivers
he talked with on every journey the massa made to attend
sick people or to discuss what was going on in New

England with other massas in their big houses, or the
county seat or nearby towns.
“White folks ain’t got no secrets,” the fiddler said to
Kunta. “Dey’s swamped deyselves wid niggers. Ain’t much
dey do, hardly nowheres dey go, it ain’t niggers listenin’. If
dey eatin’ an’ talkin’, nigger gal servin’ ’em actin’ dumber’n
she is, ’memberin’ eve’y word she hear. Even when white
folks gits so scared dey starts spellin’ out words, if any
niggers roun’, well, plenty house niggers ain’t long repeatin’
it letter for letter to de nearest nigger what can spell an’
piece together what was said. I mean dem niggers don’
sleep’fore dey knows what dem white folks was talkin’
’bout.”
What was happening “up Nawth” continued to arrive
piece by piece through the summer and into the fall. Then,
as time passed, Luther began to report that as exercised
as white folks were about the taxes, that wasn’t their only
worry. “Dey’s sayin’ it’s some counties got twice many
niggers as white folks. Dey’s worryin’ dat king’crost the
water might start offerin’ us niggers freedom to fight’gainst
dese white folks.” Luther waited for the gasps of his
audience to subside. “Fact,” he said, “done heared some
white folks so scared, done took to lockin’ dey doors at
night, done even quit talkin’ roun’ dey house niggers.”
Kunta lay on his mattress at night for weeks afterward
thinking about “freedom.” As far as he could tell, it meant
having no massa at all, doing as one wanted, going
wherever one pleased. But it was ridiculous, he decided
finally, to think that white folks would bring blacks all the way
across the big water to work as slaves—and then set them
free. It would never happen.
Shortly before Christmas, some of Massa Waller’s
relatives arrived for a visit, and their black buggy driver was
eating his fill in Bell’s kitchen while regaling her with the
latest news. “Done heared dat over in Geo’gia,” he said,
“nigger name a George Leile, de Baptis’ white folks done
give ’im a license to preach to niggers up an’ down de
Savannah River. Hear de claim he gon’ start a African
Baptis’ church in Savannah. First time I heard ’bout any

nigger church. . . . ”
Bell said, “I heard ’bout one ’fo’ now in Petersburg, right
here in Virginia. But tell me, you heared anythin’ about de
white folks’ troubles up Nawth?”
“Well, I hear tell while back whole lotta impo’tant white
folks had a big meetin’ in dat Philadelphia. Dey call it de
First Continental Congress.”
Bell said she had heard that. In fact, she had
painstakingly read it in Massa Waller’s Virginia Gazette,
and then she had shared the information with the old
gardener and the fiddler. They were the only ones who
knew she could read a little. When they had spoken about it
recently, the gardener and the fiddler had agreed that Kunta
shouldn’t be told of her ability. True, he knew how to keep
his mouth shut, and he had come to understand and
express things unexpectedly well for anyone from Africa,
but they felt that he couldn’t yet fully appreciate how serious
the consequences would be if the massa got the slightest
hint that she could read: He would sell her away that same
day.
By early the next year—1775—almost no news from any
source was without some further development in
Philadelphia. Even from what Kunta heard and could
understand, it was clear that the white folks were moving
toward a crisis with the king across the big water in the
place called England. And there was a lot of exclaiming
about some Massa Patrick Henry having cried out, “Give
me liberty or give me death!” Kunta liked that, but he
couldn’t understand how somebody white could say it; white
folks looked pretty free to him.
Within a month came news that two whites named
William Dawes and Paul Revere had raced on horses to
warn somebody of hundreds of King’s soldiers heading for
somewhere called “Concord” to destroy rifles and bullets
that were stored there. And soon afterward they heard that
in a furious battle at “Lexington,” some “Minutemen” had
lost only a handful while killing over two hundred King’s
soldiers. Scarcely two days later came word that yet
another thousand of them had fallen in a bloody battle at a

place called “Bunker Hill.” “White folks at the county seat is
laughin’, sayin’ dem king’s soldiers wears red coats not to
show de blood,” said Luther. “Heared some a dat blood
gettin’ spilt by niggers fightin’ ’longside white folks.”
Wherever he went now, he said he kept on hearing that
Virginia massas were showing greater than usual signs of
mistrust toward their slaves—“even dey oldest house
niggers!”
Relishing his new importance along slave row, Luther
arrived home from a trip in June to find an anxious
audience awaiting his latest news. “It’s some Massa
George Washington got picked to run a army. Nigger tol’
me he’s heared he got a big plantation wid plenty a slaves.”
He said he had also heard that some New England slaves
had been set free to help fight the king’s redcoats.
“I knowed it!” the fiddler exclaimed. “Niggers gon’ git
dragged in it an’ kilt, jes’ like dat French an’ Indian War.
Den soon’s it’s over, white folks be right back whippin’
niggers!”
“Maybe not,” said Luther. “Heared some white folks call
themselves Quakers done put together a Anti-Slavery
Society, up in dat Philadelphia. Reckon dey’s some white
folks jes’ don’t believe in niggers bein’ slaves.”
“Me neither,” put in the fiddler.
The frequent bits of news that Bell contributed would
sound as if she had been discussing them with the massa
himself, but she finally admitted that she had been listening
at the keyhole of the dining room whenever the massa had
guests, for not long ago he had curtly told her to serve them
and leave immediately, closing the door behind her; then
she had heard him lock it. “An’ I knows dat man better’n his
mammy!” she muttered indignantly.
“What he say in dere after he lock de do’?” asked the
fiddler impatiently.
“Well, tonight he say don’t seem no way not to fight dem
English folks. He speck dey gon’ send big boatloads a
soldiers over here. He say it’s over two hunnud thousand
slaves just in Virginia, an’ de biggest worry is if dem
Englishmans ever riles up us niggers’gainst white folks.

Massa say he feel loyal to de king as any man, but ain’t
nobody can stan’ dem taxes.”
“Gen’l Washington done stopped ’em taking any more
niggers in the Army,” said Luther, “but some free niggers up
Nawth is arguin’ dey’s part of dis country an’ wants to fight.”
“Dey sho’ gon’ git dey chance, jes’ let ’nough white folks
git kilt,” said the fiddler. “Dem free niggers is crazy.”
But the news that followed two weeks later was even
bigger. Lord Dunmore, the royal governor of Virginia, had
proclaimed freedom for slaves who would leave their
plantations to serve on his English fleet of fishing boats and
frigates.
“Massa fit to be tied,” reported Bell. “Man come to dinner
say lotta talk ’bout chainin’ or jailin’ slaves suspicioned a
joinin’ up—or even thinkin’ ’bout it—an’ maybe kidnapin’
an’ hangin’ dat Lord Dunmore.”
Kunta had been given the job of watering and feeding the
horses of the flushed, agitated massas who visited the
grim-jawed Massa Waller. And Kunta told how some of the
horses had sweat-soaked flanks from long, hard riding, and
how some of the massas were even driving their own
buggies. One of them, he told the others, was John Waller,
the massa’s brother, the man who had bought Kunta when
they took him off the boat eight years before. After all that
time, he had known that hated face at first glance, but the
man had tossed the reins to Kunta with no apparent
recognition.
“Don’ ack so surprised,” said the fiddler. “Massa like him
ain’t gone say howdy to no nigger. ’Specially if’n he
’members who you is.”
Over the next few weeks, Bell learned at the keyhole of
the massa’s and his visitors’ alarm and fury that thousands
of Georgia, South Carolina, and Virginia slaves were said
to be boldly fleeing their plantations to join Lord Dunmore.
Some said they had heard that most of the fleeing slaves
were simply heading for the North. But all the whites agreed
on the need to start breeding more bloodhounds.
Then one day Massa Waller called Bell into the living
room and twice read slowly aloud a marked item in his

Virginia Gazette. He ordered Bell to show it to the slaves,
and handed the paper to her. She did as she was told, and
they reacted just as she had—less with fear than anger. “Be
not, ye Negroes, tempted to ruin yourselves . . . whether we
suffer or not, if you desert us, you most certainly will.”
Before returning the Gazette, Bell spelled out for her own
information several other news items in the privacy of her
cabin, and among them were reports of actual or predicted
slave revolts. Later the massa shouted at her for not
returning the paper before supper, and Bell apologized in
tears. But soon she was sent out again with another
message—this time the news that Virginia’s House of
Burgesses had decreed “death without benefit of clergy for
all Negro or other slaves conspiring to rebel or make
insurrections.”
“What do it mean?” a field hand asked, and the fiddler
replied, “Uprise, an’ white folks won’t call no preacher when
dey kills you!”
Luther heard that some white folks called “Tories,” and
some other kind called “Scotchmen,” were joining with the
English. “An’ sheriff’s nigger tol’ me dat Lord Dunmore’s
ruinin’ river plantations, burnin’ big houses, an’ tellin’ de
niggers he free ’em if’n dey come on an’ jine ’im.” Luther
told how in Yorktown and other towns, any blacks caught
out at night were being whipped and jailed.
Christmas that year was but a word. Lord Dunmore was
reported to have barely outraced a mob onto the safety of
his flag-ship. And a week later came the incredible news
that Dunmore, with his fleet off Norfolk, had ordered the city
emptied within one hour. Then his guns began a
bombardment that set raging fires, and much of Norfolk had
been reduced to ashes. In what was left, Bell reported,
water and food were scarce, and fever had broken out,
killing so many that Hampton Roads’ waters were dotted
with bloated bodies drifting ashore with the tides. “Say
dey’s buryin’ ’em in san’ an’ mud,” said Luther. “An’ lotta
niggers near ’bout starvin’ an’ scared to death on dem
English boats.”
Mulling over all these terrible events, Kunta felt that in

some unfathomable way, all of this suffering must have
some meaning, some reason, that Allah must have willed it.
Whatever was going to happen next, both to black and
white, must be His design.
It was early in 1776 when Kunta and the others heard that
a General Cornwallis had come from England with boatfuls
of sailors and soldiers trying to cross a big “York River,” but
a great storm had scattered the boats. They heard next that
another Continental Congress had met, with a group of
massas from Virginia moving for complete separation from
the English. Then two months of minor news passed before
Luther returned from the county seat with the news that after
another meeting on July 4, “All the white folks I seen is jes’
carryin’ on! Somethin’ ’bout some Decoration a
Ind’pen’ence. Heared ’em say Massa John Hancock done
writ his name real big so the king wouldn’t have to strain
none to see it.”
On his next trips to the county seat, Luther returned with
accounts he had heard that in Baltimore, a life-sized rag
doll “king” had been carted through the streets, then thrown
into a bonfire surrounded by white people shouting “Tyrant!
Tyrant!” And in Richmond, rifles had been fired in volleys as
shouting white people waved their torches and drank toasts
to each other. Along the subdued slave row, the old
gardener said, “Ain’t nothin’ neither way for niggers to holler
’bout. England or here, dey’s all white folks.”
Later that summer, Bell bustled over to slave row with
news from a dinner guest that the House of Burgesses had
just recently passed an act that “say dey gon’ take niggers
in the Army as drummers, fifers, or pioneers.”
“What’s pioneers?” asked a field hand.
“It mean git stuck up front an’ git kilt!” said the fiddler.
Luther soon brought home an exciting account of a big
battle right there in Virginia that had slaves fighting on both
sides. Amid a hail of musket balls from hundreds of
redcoats and Tories, along with a group of convicts and
blacks, a smaller force of white “Colonials” and their blacks
were driven across a bridge, but in the rear a slave soldier
named Billy Flora had ripped up and hurled away enough

planks from the bridge that the English forces had to stop
and withdraw, saving the day for the Colonial forces.
“Rip up a bridge! Dat musta been some strong nigger!”
the gardener exclaimed.
When the French entered the war on the Colonial side in
1778, Bell relayed reports that one state after another was
authorizing the enlisting of slaves with the promise of
freedom when the war was won. “Now ain’t but two states
lef’ dat say dey ain’t gon’ never let niggers fight, dat’s South
Ca’lina an’ Geo’gia.”
“Dat de only thing good I ever heared ’bout neither one a
dem!” said the fiddler.
As much as he hated slavery, it seemed to Kunta that no
good could come of the white folks giving guns to blacks.
First of all, the whites would always have more guns than
the blacks, so any attempt to revolt would end in defeat And
he thought about how in his own homeland, guns and
bullets had been given by the toubob to evil chiefs and
kings, until blacks were fighting blacks, village against
village, and selling those they conquered—their own people
—into chains.
Once Bell heard the massa say that as many as five
thousand blacks, both free and slave, were in the fighting
that was going on, and Luther regularly brought stories of
blacks fighting and dying alongside their massas. Luther
also told of some all-black companies from “up Nawth,”
even one all-black battalion called “The Bucks of America.”
“Even dey colonel is a nigger,” said Luther. “His name
Middleton.” He looked archly at the fiddler. “You won’t never
guess what he is!”
“What you mean?” said the fiddler.
“He a fiddler, too! An’ it’s time to do some fiddlin’!”
Then Luther hummed and sang a new song he had heard
in the county seat. The catchiness of it was easy to pick up,
and soon others were singing it, and still others beating
time with sticks. “Yankee Doodle came to town, ridin’ on a
pony. . . .” And when the fiddler started playing, the slave
row young’uns began to dance and clap their hands.
With May of 1781 came the astounding story that

redcoats on horses had ruined Massa Thomas Jefferson’s
plantation called Monticello. The crops had been
destroyed, the barn burned, the livestock run off, and all the
horses and thirty slaves had been taken. “White folks sayin’
Virginia got to be saved,” Luther reported, and soon after
he told of white joy because General Washington’s army
was headed there. “An’ niggers a plenty is in it!” October
brought reports that the combined forces of Washington
and Lafayette had poured shot and shell into Yorktown,
attacking England’s Cornwallis. And they soon learned of
other battles raging in Virginia, New York, North Carolina,
Maryland, and other states. Then in the third week of the
month came the news that set even slave row shouting:
“Cornwallis done surrendered! War am ober! Freedom am
won!”
Luther barely had time to sleep between buggy journeys
now, and the massa was even smiling again—for the first
time in years, said Bell.
“Ev’ywhere I’s been, de niggers is hollerin’ loud as white
folks,” said Luther.
But he said that slaves everywhere had rejoiced most
over their special hero, “Ol’ Billy” Flora, who had recently
been discharged and carried his faithful musket back to
Norfolk.
“Y’all come here!” Bell shouted, summoning the others on
slave row not long after. “Massa jes’ tol’ me dey done
named that Philadelphia firs’ capital of Newnited States!”
But it was Luther who told them later, “Massa Jefferson
done put up some kin’ of Manumission Ack. It say massas
got de right to free niggers, but tell me dem Quakers an’
antislavery folks an’ free niggers up Nawth is hollerin’ an’
goin’ on ’cause the Ack say massas don’t have to, not
less’n dey wants to.”
When General Washington disbanded the army early in
November of 1783, formally ending what most people had
begun calling “The Seven Years’ War,” Bell told everyone in
slave row, “Massa say gon’ be peace now.”
“Ain’t gon’ be no peace, not long as it’s white folks,” said
the fiddler sourly, “’cause ain’t nothin’ dey loves better’n

killin’.” His glance flicked among the faces around him.
“Jes’ watch what I tell you—it’s gon’ be worse’n it was for us
niggers.”
Kunta and the old gardener sat later talking quietly. “You
seen aplenty since you been here. How long it’s been,
anyhow?” Kunta didn’t know, and that troubled him.
That night, when he was alone, Kunta spent hours
carefully arranging into piles of twelve all of the multicolored
pebbles that he had dropped faithfully into his gourd with
each new moon. He was so stunned by what the stones
finally told him that the gardener never learned the answer
to his question. Surrounding him there on the dirt floor of his
hut were seventeen piles of stones. He was thirty-four rains
old! What in the name of Allah had happened to his life? He
had been in the white man’s land as long as he had lived in
Juffure. Was he still an African, or had he become a
“nigger,” as the others called themselves? Was he even a
man? He was the same age as his father when he had
seen him last, yet he had no sons of his own, no wife, no
family, no village, no people, no homeland, almost no past
at all that seemed real to him anymore—and no future he
could see. It was as if The Gambia had been a dream he’d
had once long ago. Or was he still asleep? And if he was,
would he ever waken?

CHAPTER 57
Kunta didn’t have long to brood about the future, for a few
days later came news that took the plantation by storm. A
captured runaway housegirl, reported Bell breathlessly after
the sheriff arrived for a hushed meeting with the massa
behind closed doors, had admitted under a lashing that her
crude escape route had been drawn for her by none other
than the massa’s driver, Luther.
Storming out to slave row before Luther could run away,
Massa Waller confronted him with the sheriff and
demanded angrily to know if it was true. Terrified, Luther
admitted that it was. Red-faced with rage, the massa lifted
his arm to strike, but when Luther begged for mercy, he
lowered it again and stood there staring silently at Luther
for a long moment, tears of fury welling in his eyes.
At last he spoke, very quietly: “Sheriff, put this man under
arrest and take him to jail. He is to be sold at the next slave
auction.” And without another word he turned and walked
back to the house, ignoring Luther’s anguished sobs.
Speculation had hardly begun about who would be
assigned to replace him as the massa’s driver when Bell
came out one night and told Kunta that the massa wanted
to see him right away. Everyone watched—but no one was
surprised—as he went cripping into the house behind Bell.
Though he suspected why he had been called, Kunta felt a
little scared, for he had never spoken to the massa or even
been beyond Bell’s kitchen in the big house during all his
sixteen years on the plantation.
As Bell led him through the kitchen into a hallway, his
eyes goggled at the shining floor and the high, papered
walls. She knocked at a huge carved door. He heard the
massa say, “Come in!” and Bell went on inside, turning to
beckon expressionlessly to Kunta. He couldn’t believe the
size of the room; it seemed as big as the inside of the barn.
The polished oaken floor was covered with rugs, and the
walls were hung with paintings and tapestries. The richly

dark, matched furniture was waxed, and long rows of books
sat on recessed shelves. Massa Waller sat at a desk
reading under an oil lamp with a circular shade of greenish
glass, and his finger held his place in his book when, after a
moment, he turned around to face Kunta.
“Toby, I need a buggy driver. You’ve grown into a man on
this place, and I believe you’re loyal.” His widely set blue
eyes seemed to pierce Kunta. “Bell tells me that you never
drink. I like that, and I’ve noticed how you conduct yourself.”
Massa Waller paused. Bell shot a look at Kunta. “Yassuh,
Massa,” he said quickly.
“You know what happened to Luther?” the massa asked.
“Yassuh,” said Kunta. The massa’s eyes narrowed, and his
voice turned cold and hard. “I’d sell you in a minute,” he
said. “I’d sell Bell if you two had no better sense.”
As they stood there silently, the massa reopened his
book. “All right, start driving me tomorrow. I’m going to
Newport. I’ll show you the way until you learn.” The massa
glanced at Bell. “Get him the proper clothes And tell the
fiddler that he’ll be replacing Toby in the garden.”
“Yassuh, Massa,” Bell said, as she and Kunta left.
Bell brought him the clothing, but it was the fiddler and
the old gardener who supervised Kunta’s dressing early the
next morning in the starched and pressed canvas trousers
and cotton hemp shirt. They didn’t look too bad, but that
black string tie they helped him put on next, he felt, made
him look ridiculous.
“Newport ain’t nowhere to drive, jes’ right up next to
Spotsylvania Courthouse,” said the old gardener. “It’s ONE
a de ol’ Waller family big houses.”
The fiddler—who by this time had been told of his own
new duties as well as Kunta’s—was walking around
inspecting him with an expression that revealed
transparently both his pleasure and his jealousy. “You a
sho’ nuff special nigger now, no two ways’bout it. Jes’ don’t
let it git to yo’ head.”
It was unnecessary advice for one who—even after all
this time—found no dignity in anything he was made to do
for the white man. But whatever small excitement Kunta felt

at the prospect of being able to leave his garden behind
and widen his horizons—as his uncles Janneh and Saloum
had done—was soon forgotten in the heat of his new
duties.
Summoned by his patients at any hour of the day or night,
Massa Waller would call Kunta rushing from his hut to hitch
the horses for breakneck rides to homes sometimes many
miles from the plantation down narrow, twisting roads that
were hardly smoother than the countryside around them.
Lurching and careening over ruts and potholes, laying on
the whip until the horses heaved for breath, Massa Waller
clinging to his canopied rear seat, Kunta showed a knack
for the reins that somehow saw them safely to their
destination even in the spring thaw, when the red-clay
roads turned into treacherous rivers of mud.
Early one morning, the massa’s brother John came
galloping in, frantically reporting that his wife’s labor pains
had begun, although it was two months before the birth had
been expected. Massa John’s horse was too exhausted to
return without rest, and Kunta had driven both of them back
to Massa John’s barely in the nick of time. Kunta’s own
overheated horses hadn’t cooled down enough for him to
give them water when he heard the shrill cries of a newborn
baby. It was a five-pound girl, the massa told him on their
way home, and they were going to call her Anne.
And so it went. During that same frantic summer and fall,
there was a plague of black vomiting that claimed victims
all over the county—so many that Massa Waller and Kunta
couldn’t keep up with them, and soon drove themselves into
fever. Downing copious dosages of quinine to keep them
going, they saved more lives than they lost. But Kunta’s own
life became a blur of countless big-house kitchens, catnaps
on pallets in strange huts or in haymows, and endless hours
of sitting in the buggy outside shanties and grand homes
listening to the same cries of pain while he waited for the
massa to reappear so that they could return home—or
more often drive on to the next patient.
But Massa Waller didn’t travel always in the midst of
crisis. Sometimes entire weeks would pass without

anything more urgent than routine house calls or visits to
one of a seemingly inexhaustible assortment of relatives
and friends whose plantations were located somewhere
within driving distance. On such occasions—particularly in
the spring and summer, when the meadows were thick with
flowers, wild strawberries, and blackberry thickets, and the
fences were trellised with lushly growing vines—the buggy
would roll along leisurely behind its finely matched pair of
bay horses, Massa Waller sometimes nodding off under
the black canopy that shielded him from the sun.
Everywhere were quail whirring up, brilliant red cardinals
hopping about, meadowlarks and whippoorwills calling out.
Now and then a bullsnake sunning on the road, disturbed by
the oncoming buggy, would go slithering for safety, or a
buzzard would go flapping heavily away from its dead
rabbit. But Kunta’s favorite sight was a lonely old oak or
cedar in the middle of a field; it would send his mind back
to the baobabs of Africa, and to the elders’ saying that
wherever one stood alone, there had once been a village.
At such times he would think of Juffure.
On his social calls, the massa went most often to visit his
parents at Enfield, their plantation on the borderline
between King William County and King and Queen County.
Approaching it—like all the Waller family big houses—the
buggy would roll down a long double avenue of huge old
trees and stop beneath a massive black walnut tree on the
wide front lawn. The house, which was much bigger and
richer looking than the massa’s, sat on a slight rise
overlooking a narrow, slow-moving river.
During his first few months of driving, the cooks at the
various plantations in whose kitchens Kunta was fed—but
most especially Hattie Mae, the fat, haughty, shiny-black
cook at Enfield—had eyed him critically, as fiercely
possessive of their domains as Bell was at Massa
Waller’s. Confronted with Kunta’s stiff dignity and reserve,
though, none quite ventured to challenge him in any way
directly, and he would silently clean his plate of whatever
they served him, excepting any pork. Eventually, however,
they began to get used to his quiet ways, and after his sixth

or seventh visit, even the cook at Enfield apparently
decided that he was fit for her to talk to and deigned to
speak to him.
“You know where you at?” she asked him suddenly one
day in the middle of his meal. He didn’t answer, and she
didn’t wait for one.
“Dis here’s de first Newnited States house of de Wallers.
Nobody but Wallers lived here for a hunerd an’ fifty years!”
She said that when Enfield had been built it was only half its
present size, but that later another house had been brought
up from near the river and added on. “Our fireplace is
bricks brought in boats from England,” she said proudly.
Kunta nodded politely as she droned on, but he was
unimpressed.
Once in a while, Massa Waller would pay a visit to
Newport, Kunta’s first destination as a driver; it seemed
impossible to believe that an entire year had passed since
then. And old uncle and aunt of the massa’s lived there in a
house that looked to Kunta very much like Enfield. While the
white folks ate in the dining room, the cook at Newport
would feed Kunta in the kitchen, strutting around with a
large ring of keys on a thin leather belt around the top of her
apron. He had noticed by now that every senior housemaid
wore such a key ring. On it, he had learned, in addition to
her keys for the pantry, the smokehouse, the cooling cellar,
and other food-storage places, were the keys to all the
rooms and closets in the big house. Every cook he’d met
would walk in a way to make those keys jangle as a badge
of how important and trusted she was, but none jangled
them louder than this one.
On a recent visit, having decided—like the cook at
Enfield—that he might be all right after all, she pressed a
finger to her lips and led Kunta on tiptoe to a small room
farther within the big house. Making a great show of
unlocking the door with one of the keys at her waist, she led
him inside and pointed to one wall. On it was a mounted
display of what she explained were the Wallers’ coat of
arms, their silver seal, a suit of armor, silver pistols, a silver
sword, and the prayer book of the original Colonel Waller.

Pleased at the ill-concealed amazement on Kunta’s face,
she exclaimed, “Ol’ colonel built dat Enfield, but he buried
right here.” And walking outside, she showed him the grave
and its lettered tombstone. After a minute, as Kunta stared
at it, she asked with a rehearsed casualness, “You wanna
know what it say?” Kunta nodded his head, and rapidly she
“read” the long since memorized inscription: “Sacred to
Memory of Colonel John Waller, Gentleman, third son of
John Waller and Mary Key, who settled in Virginia in 1635,
from Newport Paganel, Buckinghamshire.”
Several cousins of massa’s, Kunta soon discovered,
lived at Prospect Hill, also in Spotsylvania County. Like
Enfield, the big house here was one and a half stories high,
as were nearly all very old big houses, the cook at Prospect
Hill told him, because the king had put an extra tax on twostory houses. Unlike Enfield, Prospect Hill was rather small
—smaller than the other Waller family houses—but none,
she informed him, whether or not he cared to listen, had as
wide an entrance hall or as steep a circular stairway.
“You ain’t gwine upstairs, but no reason you cain’t know
us got four-poster canopy beds up dere so tall dey has to
use stepladders, an’ under dem is chillun’s trundle beds.
An’ lemme tell you sump’n. Dem beds, de chimney bricks,
house beams, hinges on de do’s, ev’eything usn’s got in
here was made or did by slave niggers.”
In the backyard, she showed Kunta the first weaving
house he had ever seen, and nearby were the slave
quarters—which were about the same as theirs—and
below them was a pond, and farther beyond was a slaves’
graveyard. “I knows you ain’t want to see dat,” she said,
reading his thoughts. He wondered if she also knew how
strange and sad he found it to hear her talking—as so
many others did—about “usn’s,” and acting as if she owned
the plantation she lived on instead of the other way around.

CHAPTER 58
“How come massa been seein’ so much a dat no-good
brother a his las’ few months?” asked Bell one evening
after Kunta trudged in after arriving home from a visit to
Massa John’s plantation. “I thought they was no love los’
’tween dem two.”
“Look to me like massa jes’ gone crazy ’bout dat l’il ol’
gal baby dey got,” said Kunta wearily.
“She sho is a cute l’il thin’,” said Bell. After a thoughtful
pause, she added, “Reckon Missy Anne seem to massa
like dat l’il gal of his own he los’.”
That hadn’t occurred to Kunta, who still found it difficult to
think of toubob as actual human beings.
“She gon’ be a whole year ol’ dis November, ain’t she?”
asked Bell.
Kunta shrugged. All he knew was that all this running
back and forth between the two plantations was wearing
ruts in the road—and in his rump. Even though he had no
use for Massa John’s sour-faced buggy driver Roosby, he
told Bell he was grateful for the rest when the massa invited
his brother to visit him for a change the week before.
As they were leaving that day, Bell recalled, the massa
had looked as happy as his little niece when he tossed her
in the air and caught her, squealing and laughing, before
handing her up to her mother in the buggy. Kunta hadn’t
noticed and he didn’t care—and he couldn’t understand
why Bell did.
One afternoon a few days later, on their way home from a
house call on one of Massa Waller’s patients at a plantation
not far from Newport, the massa called out sharply to Kunta
that he had just passed a turn they should have taken.
Kunta had been driving without seeing, so shocked was he
by what he had just seen at the patient’s big house. Even
as he muttered an apology and turned the buggy hastily
around, he couldn’t rid his mind of the sight of the heavy,
very black, Wolof-looking woman he had seen in the

backyard. She had been sitting on a stump, both of her
large breasts hanging out, matter-of-factly suckling a white
infant at one and a black infant at the other. It was a
revolting sight to Kunta, and an astonishing one, but when
he told the gardener about it later, the old man said, “Ain’t
hardly a massa in Virginia ain’t sucked a black mammy, or
leas’ was raised up by one.”
Almost as repulsive to Kunta was something he’d seen
all too much of—the kind of demeaning “games” that went
on at the plantations he visited between white and black
“young’uns” of about the same age. The white children
seemed to love nothing more than playing “massa” and
pretending to beat the black ones, or playing “hosses” by
climbing onto their backs and making them scramble about
on all fours. Playing “school,” the white children would
“teach” the black to read and write, with many cuffings and
shriekings about their “dumbness.” Yet after lunch—which
the black children would spend fanning the massa and his
family with leafy branches to keep flies away—the white
and black children would lie down together and take naps
on pallets.
After seeing such things, Kunta would always tell Bell, the
fiddler, and the gardener that he’d never understand the
toubob if he lived to a hundred rains. And they would always
laugh and tell him that they’d seen this sort of thing—and
more—all of their lives.
Sometimes, they told him, as the white and black
“young’uns” grew up together, they became very attached
to one another. Bell recalled two occasions when the
massa had been called to attend white girls who had fallen
ill when their lifelong black playmates had been sold away
for some reason. Their massas and mistresses had been
advised that their daughters’ hysterical grief was such that
they might well grow weaker and weaker until they died,
unless their little girlfriends were quickly found and bought
back.
The fiddler said that a lot of black young’uns had learned
to play the violin, the harpsichord, or other instruments by
listening and observing as their white playmates were

taught by music masters whom their rich massas had hired
from across the big water. The old gardener said that on
his second plantation a white and black boy grew up
together until finally the young massa took the black one off
with him to William and Mary College. “Ol’ Massa ain’t like
it a’tall; but Ol’ Missy say, ‘It’s his nigger if he want to!’ An’
when dis nigger git back later on, he tol’ us in slave row dat
dey was heap more young massas dere wid dey niggers
as valets, sleepin’ right in de room wid ’em. He say heap of
times dey take dey niggers wid ’em to classes, den dey
argue later on whose nigger learnt de mos’. Dat nigger
from my plantation couldn’t jes’ read an’ write, he could
figger, too, an’ ’cite dem poems an’ stuff dey has at
colleges. I got sol’ away roun’ den. Wonder whatever
become a him?”
“Lucky if he ain’t dead,” the fiddler said. “’Cause white
folks is quick to ’spicion a nigger like dat be de first to
hatch a uprisin’ or a re-volt somewhere. Don’t pay to know
too much, jes’ like I tol’ dis African here when he started
drivin’ massa. Mouf shut an’ ears open, dat’s de way you
learns de mos’—.”
Kunta found out how true that was soon afterward, when
Massa Waller offered a ride to a friend of his from one
plantation to another. Talking as if he wasn’t there—and
saying things that Kunta would have found extraordinary
even if they hadn’t known there was a black sitting right in
front of them—they spoke about the frustrating slowness of
their slaves’ separation of cotton fibers from the seeds by
hand when demands for cotton cloth were rapidly
increasing. They discussed how more and more, only the
largest planters could afford to buy slaves at the robbery
prices being demanded by slave traders and slave-ship
agents.
“But even if you can afford it, bigness can create more
problems than it solves,” said the massa. “The more slaves
you’ve got, the likelier it is that some kind of revolt could be
fomented.”
“We should never have let them bear arms against white
men during the war,” said his companion. “Now we witness

the result!” He went on to tell how, at a large plantation near
Fredericksburg, some former slave soldiers had been
caught just before a planned revolt, but only because a
housemaid had gotten some wind of it and told her
mistress in tears. “They had muskets, scythe blades,
pitchforks, they had even made spears,” said the massa’s
friend. “It’s said their plot was to kill and burn by night and
hide by day and keep moving. One of their ringleaders said
they expected to die, but not before they had done what the
war had showed them they could do to white people.”
“They could have cost many innocent lives,” he heard the
massa reply gravely. Massa Waller went on to say that he
had read somewhere that over two hundred slave
outbreaks had occurred since the first slaveships came.
“I’ve been saying for years that our greatest danger is that
slaves are coming to outnumber whites.”
“You’re right!” his friend exclaimed. “You don’t know
who’s shuffling and grinning and planning to cut your throat.
Even the ones right in your house. You simply can’t trust any
of them. It’s in their very nature.”
His back as rigid as a board, Kunta heard the massa
say, “As a doctor, more than once I’ve seen white deaths
that—well, I’ll not go into details, but let’s just say I’ve
thought some of them suspicious.”
Hardly feeling the reins in his hands, Kunta was unable to
comprehend that they could seem so incredibly unaware of
him. His mind tumbled with things that he too had heard
during the nearly two years now that he had been driving
the buggy for the massa. He had heard many a whispering
of cooks and maids grinning and bowing as they served
food containing some of their own bodily wastes. And he
had been told of white folks’ meals containing bits of
ground glass, or arsenic, or other poisons. He had even
heard stories about white babies going into mysterious
fatal comas without any trace of the darning needle that had
been thrust by house-maids into their soft heads where the
hair was thickest. And a big-house cook had pointed out to
him the former hut of an old mammy nurse who had been
beaten badly and then sold away after severely injuring a

young massa who had hit her.
It seemed to Kunta that black women here were even
more defiant and rebellious than the men. But perhaps it
only appeared that way because the women were more
direct and personal about it; they would usually take
revenge against white folks who had wronged them. The
men tended to be more secretive and less vengeful. The
fiddler had told Kunta about a white overseer who had been
hanged from a tree by the father of a black girl he had been
caught raping; but violence against whites by black men
was most often ignited by news of white atrocities or slave
rebellions and the like.
There had never been any uprisings, or even any
incidents, at the Waller place, but right there in Spotsylvania
County, Kunta had heard about some blacks who had
hidden muskets and other weapons and vowed to kill their
massas or mistresses, or both, and put their plantations to
the torch. And there were some men among those he
worked with who would meet in secret to discuss anything
good or bad that happened to slaves elsewhere and to
consider any action they might take to help; but so far they
had only talked.
Kunta had never been invited to join them—probably, he
thought, because they felt that his foot would make him
useless to them in an actual revolt. Whatever their reasons
for leaving him out, he felt it was just as well. Though he
wished them luck in whatever they might decide to do,
Kunta didn’t believe that a rebellion could ever succeed
against such overwhelming odds. Perhaps, as Massa
Waller had said, blacks might soon outnumber whites, but
they could never overpower them—not with pitchforks,
kitchen knives, and stolen muskets against the massed
armies of the white nation and its cannons.
But their worst enemy, it seemed to Kunta, was
themselves. There were a few young rebels among them,
but the vast majority of slaves were the kind that did exactly
what was expected of them, usually without even having to
be told; the kind white folks could—and did—trust with the
lives of their own children, the kind that looked the other

way when the white man took their women into haymows.
Why, there were some right there on the plantation he was
sure the massa could leave unguarded for a year and find
them there—still working—when he returned. It certainly
wasn’t because they were content; they complained
constantly among themselves. But never did more than a
handful so much as protest, let alone resist.
Perhaps he was becoming like them, Kunta thought. Or
perhaps he was simply growing up. Or was he just growing
old? He didn’t know; but he knew that he had lost his taste
for fighting and running, and he wanted to be left alone, he
wanted to mind his own business. Those who didn’t had a
way of winding up dead.

CHAPTER 59
Dozing off in the shade of an oak tree in the backyard of a
plantation where the massa was visiting to treat an entire
family that had come down with a fever, Kunta woke up with
a start when the evening conch horn blew to call the slaves
in from the fields. He was still rubbing the sleep from his
eyes when they reached the yard. Glancing up as they
passed by on their way to wash up for supper, he noticed
that there were about twenty or thirty of them. He looked
again. Maybe he was still sleeping, but four of them—a
man, a woman, and two teen-age boys—were white.
“Dey’s what you call indentured white folks,” his friend the
cook explained when he expressed his amazement to her a
few minutes later. “Been here ’bout two months now. Dey’s
a fambly from someplace ’crost de big water. Massa pay
dere way here on de boat, so dey gotta pay him back by
workin’ seben years as slaves. Den dey free jus’ like any
other white folks.”
“Dey live in slave row?” asked Kunta.
“Dey got dey own cabin off a ways from our’n, but it jus’
as tumbledown as de res’. And dey eats de same mess we
does. An’ don’t get treated no different out in de fiel’.”
“What dey like?” asked Kunta.
“Dey sticks pretty much to deyselves, but dey awright.
Ain’t like us’ns, but does dey job and don’t make no trouble
for nobody.”
It seemed to Kunta that these white slaves were better off
than most of the free whites he’d seen on the massa’s
rounds. With often as many as a dozen grown-ups and
children packed on top of each other in one-room hovels on
tiny patches of red clay or swampland, they scratched out a
living so meager that the blacks laughingly sang a song
about them: “Not po’ white, please, O Lawd, fer I’d ruther be
a nigger.” Though he had never seen it for himself, Kunta
had heard that some of these whites were so poor that they
even had to eat dirt. They were certainly skinny enough, and

few of them—even the “chilluns”—had any teeth left. And
they smelled like they slept with their flea-bitten hounds,
which many of them did. Trying to breathe through his
mouth as he waited in the buggy outside their shacks while
the massa treated one of them for scurvy or pellagra,
watching the women and the children plowing and chopping
while the menfolk lay under a tree with a brown jug of liquor
and their dogs, all scratching, it was easy for Kunta to
understand why plantation-owning massas and even their
slaves scorned and sneered at them as “lazy, shiftless, nocount white trash.”
In fact, as far as he was concerned, that was a charitable
description of heathens so shameless that they managed
to commit every conceivable offense against the standards
of decency upheld by the most sacrilegious Moslem. On his
trips with the massa to neighboring towns, there would
always be packs of them idling around the courthouse or
the saloon even in the morning—dressed in their sweatstained, greasy, threadbare castoffs, reeking of the filthy
tobacco weed, which they puffed incessantly, swigging
“white lightning” from bottles they carried in their pockets,
laughing and yelling raucously at one another as they knelt
on the ground in alleys playing cards and dice for money.
By midafternoon, they would be making complete fools of
themselves: bursting drunkenly into song, cavorting wildly
up and down the street, whistling and calling out indecently
to women who passed by, arguing and cursing loudly
among themselves, and finally starting fights that would
begin with a shove or a punch—while huge crowds of
others like them would gather round to cheer them on—and
end with ear-biting, eye-gouging, kicking of private parts,
and bloody wounds that would almost always call for the
massa’s urgent attention. Even the wild animals of his
homeland, it seemed to Kunta, had more dignity than these
creatures.
Bell was always telling stories about poor whites getting
flogged for beating their wives and being sentenced to a
year’s imprisonment for rape. Almost as often, she told
about one of them stabbing or shooting another one to

death; for that they might be forced to serve six months as a
slave. But as much as they loved violence among
themselves, Kunta knew from personal experience that they
loved violence against black people even more. It was a
crowd of poor whites—male and female—that had hooted
and jeered and jabbed with sticks at him and his chain
mates when they were taken from the big canoe. It was a
poor-white overseer who had applied the lash so freely to
his back at Massa John’s plantation. It was “cracker white
trash” slave catchers who had taken such glee in chopping
off his foot. And he had heard about runaways captured by
“pattyrollers” who hadn’t given them the choice he’d gotten
and sent them back to their plantations torn and broken
almost beyond recognition—and divested of their
manhood. He had never been able to figure out why poor
whites hated blacks so much. Perhaps, as the fiddler had
told him, it was because of rich whites, who had everything
they didn’t: wealth, power, and property, including slaves
who were fed, clothed, and housed while they struggled to
stay alive. But he could feel no pity for them, only a deep
loathing that had turned icy cold with the passing of the
years since the swing of an ax held by one of them had
ended forever something more precious to him than his
own life: the hope of freedom.
Later that summer of 1786, Kunta was returning to the
plantation from the county seat with news that filled him with
mixed feelings. White folks had been gathering at every
corner waving copies of the Gazette and talking heatedly
about a story in it that told of increasing numbers of
Quakers who were not only encouraging slaves to escape,
as they had been doing for several years, but had now also
begun aiding, hiding, and guiding them to safety in the
North. Poor whites and massas alike were calling furiously
for the tarring and feathering, even hanging, of any known
Quakers who might be even suspected of such seditious
acts. Kunta didn’t believe the Quakers or anybody else
would be able to help more than a few of them escape, and
sooner or later they’d get caught themselves. But it couldn’t
hurt to have white allies—they’d need them—and anything

that got their owners so frightened couldn’t be all bad.
Later that night, after Kunta told everyone in slave row
what he had seen and heard, the fiddler said that when he
had been playing for a dance across the county the week
before, he’d seen “dey moufs fallin’ open” when he cocked
an ear close enough to overhear a lawyer there confiding to
a group of big plantation owners that the will of a wealthy
Quaker named John Pleasant had bequeathed freedom to
his more than two hundred slaves. Bell, who arrived late,
said that she had just overheard Massa Waller and some
dinner guests bitterly discussing the fact that slavery had
recently been abolished in a northern state called
“Massachusetts,” and reports claimed that other states
near there would do the same.
“What ’bolished mean?” asked Kunta.
The old gardener replied, “It mean one dese days all us
niggers gon’ be free!”

CHAPTER 60
Even when he didn’t have anything he’d seen or heard in
town to tell the others, Kunta had learned to enjoy sitting
around the fire with them in front of the fiddler’s hut. But
lately he’d found that he was spending less time talking with
the fiddler—who had once been his only reason for being
there—than with Bell and the old gardener. They hadn’t
exactly cooled toward one another, but things just weren’t
the same anymore, and that saddened him. It hadn’t
brought them closer for the fiddler to get saddled with
Kunta’s gardening duties, though he’d finally managed to
get over it. But what he couldn’t seem to get used to was
the fact that Kunta soon began to replace him as the
plantation’s best-informed source of news and gossip from
the outside.
No one could have accused the fiddler of becoming tightlipped, but as time went on, his famous monologues
became shorter and shorter and more and more infrequent;
and he hardly ever played fiddle for them anymore. After he
had acted unusually subdued one evening, Kunta
mentioned it to Bell, wondering if he had done or said
anything that might have hurt his feelings.
“Don’ flatter yourself,” she told him. “Day an’ night fo’
months now, fiddler been runnin’ back an’ fo’th ’crost de
county playin’ fo’ de white folks. He jes’ too wo’ out to run
his mouf like he use to, which is fine wid me. An’ he gittin’
dollar an’ a half a night now eve’y time he play at one a dem
fancy white folks’ parties he go’to. Even when de massa
take his half, fiddler get to keep a sebentyfive cents fo’
hisself, so how come he bother playin’ fo’ niggers no mo’—
less’n you wants to take up a c’llection an’ see if’n he play
fo’ a nickel.”
She glanced up from the stove to see if Kunta was
smiling. He wasn’t. But she would have fallen into her soup
if he had been. She had seen him smile just once—when
he heard about a slave he knew from a nearby plantation

who had escaped safely to the North.
“I hears fiddler plannin’ to save up what he earn an’ buy
his freedom from de massa,” she went on.
“Time he got enough to do dat,” said Kunta gravely, “he
gonna be too ol’ to leave his hut.”
Bell laughed so hard she almost did fall into her soup.
If the fiddler never earned his freedom, it wouldn’t be for
lack of trying, Kunta decided, after hearing him play at a
party one night not long afterward. He had dropped off the
massa and was talking with the other drivers under a tree
out on the darkened lawn when the band—led by the
fiddler, obviously in rare form tonight—began to play a
Virginia reel so lively that even the white folks couldn’t keep
their feet still.
From where he sat, Kunta could see the silhouettes of
young couples whirling from the great hall out onto the
veranda through one door and back in again through
another. When the dancing was over, everybody lined up at
a long table glowing with candles and loaded with more
food than slave row got to see in a year. And when they’d
had their fill—the host’s fat daughter came back three times
for more—the cook sent out a trayful of leftovers and a
pitcher of lemonade for the drivers. Thinking that the massa
might be getting ready to leave, Kunta wolfed down a
chicken leg and a delicious sticky sweet creamy something
or other that one of the other drivers called “a ay-clair.” But
the massas, in their white suits, stood around talking quietly
for hours, gesturing with hands that held long cigars and
sipping now and then from glasses of wine that glinted in
the light from the chandelier that hung above them, while
their wives, in fine gowns, fluttered their handkerchiefs and
simpered behind their fans.
The first time he had taken the massa to one of these
“high-falutin’ to-dos,” as Bell called them, Kunta had been
all but overwhelmed by conflicting emotions: awe,
indignation, envy, contempt, fascination, revulsion—but
most of all a deep loneliness and melancholy from which it
took him almost a week to recover. He couldn’t believe that
such incredible wealth actually existed, that people really

lived that way. It took him a long time, and a great many
more parties, to realize that they didn’t live that way, that it
was all strangely unreal, a kind of beautiful dream the white
folks were having, a lie they were telling themselves: that
goodness can come from badness, that it’s possible to be
civilized with one another without treating as human beings
those whose blood, sweat, and mother’s milk made
possible the life of privilege they led.
Kunta had considered sharing these thoughts with Bell or
the old gardener, but he knew he wouldn’t be able to find
the right words in the toubob tongue. Anyway, both of them
had lived here all their lives and couldn’t be expected to
see it as he did, with the eyes of an outsider—one who had
been born free. So, as it had always been when he thought
about such things, he kept it to himself—and found himself
wishing that, even after all these years, he didn’t still feel so
alone.
About three months later Massa Waller—“’long wid jes’
’bout ev’eybody who’s anybody in de state a Virginia,”
according to the fiddler—was invited to attend the
Thanksgiving Ball his parents held each year at Enfield.
Arriving late because the massa, as usual, had to stop off
and see a patient on the way, Kunta could hear that the
party was well under way as they clip-clopped up the treelined driveway toward the big house, which was lit up from
top to bottom. Pulling up at the front door, he leaped down
to stand at attention while the doorman helped the massa
out of the buggy. That’s when he heard it. Somewhere very
nearby, the edges and heels of someone’s hands were
beating on a drumlike gourd instrument called a qua-qua,
and doing it with a sharpness and power that made Kunta
know the musician was an African.
It was all he could do to stand still until the door closed
behind the massa. Then Kunta tossed the reins to the
waiting stableboy and raced as fast as his half foot would
let him around the side of the house and across the
backyard. The sound, which was getting louder and louder,
seemed to be coming from the middle of a crowd of blacks
stomping and clapping beneath a string of lanterns that the

Wallers had allowed the slaves to put up for their own
Thanksgiving celebration. Ignoring their indignant
exclamations as he pushed his way through them, Kunta
burst into the open circle, and there he was: a lean, grayhaired, very black man squatted on the ground pounding on
his qua-qua between a mandolin player and two beef-bone
clackers. As they flicked glances up at the sudden
commotion, Kunta’s eyes met his—and a moment later
they all but sprang toward each other, the other blacks
gawking, then snickering, as they embraced.

“Ah-salakium-salaam!”
“Malakium-salaam!”
The words came as if neither of them had ever left Africa.
Kunta shoved the older man away to arm’s length. “I am’t
seed you here befo’,” he exclaimed.
“Jes’ sol’ here from ’nother plantation,” the other said.
“My massa yo’ massa’s young’un,” said Kunta. “I drives
his buggy.”
The men around them had begun muttering with
impatience for the music to start again, and they were
obviously uncomfortable at this open display of
Africanness. Both Kunta and the qua-qua player knew they
mustn’t aggravate the others any further, or one of them
might report to the white folks.
“I be back!” said Kunta.
“Salakium-salaam!” said the qua-qua player, squatting
back down.
Kunta stood there for a moment as the music began
again, then turned abruptly, through the crowd with his head
down—frustrated and embarrassed—and went to wait in
the buggy for Massa Waller.
Over the weeks that followed, Kunta’s mind tumbled with
questions about the qua-qua player. What was his tribe?
Clearly he was not Mandinka, nor of any of the other tribes
Kunta had ever seen or heard about either in The Gambia
or on the big canoe. His gray hair said that he was much
older; Kunta wondered if he had as many rains as Omoro
would by now. And how had each of them sensed that the
other was a servant of Allah? The qua-qua player’s ease

with toubob speech as well as with Islam said that he had
been a long time in the white folks’ land, probably for more
rains than Kunta had. The qua-qua player said that he had
recently been sold to Massa Waller’s father; where in
toubob land had he been for all those rains before now?
Kunta reviewed in his mind the other Africans he had
chanced to see—most of them, unfortunately, when he was
with the massa and couldn’t afford even to nod at them, let
alone meet them—in his three rains of driving the massa’s
buggy. Among them had even been one or two who were
unquestionably Mandinkas. Most of the Africans he had
glimpsed as they drove past the Saturday morning slave
auctions. But after what had happened one morning about
six months before, he had decided never to drive the buggy
anywhere near the auctions if he could possibly avoid it
without massa suspecting his reason. As they drove by that
day, a chained young Jola woman had begun shrieking
piteously. Turning to see what was the matter, he saw the
wide eyes of the Jola woman fixed on him on the high seat
of the buggy, her mouth open in a scream, beseeching him
to help her. In bitter, flooding shame, Kunta had lashed his
whip down across both horses’ rumps and they all but
bucked ahead, jolting the massa backward, terrifying Kunta
at what he had done, but the massa had said nothing.
Once Kunta had met an African slave in the county seat
while he was waiting for the massa one afternoon, but
neither one of them could understand the other’s tribal
language, and the other man hadn’t yet learned to speak
the toubob tongue. It seemed unbelievable to Kunta that it
was only after twenty rains in the white folks’ land that he
had met another African with whom he could communicate.
But for the next two months, into the spring of 1788, it
seemed to Kunta that the massa visited every patient,
relative, and friend within five counties—except for his own
parents at Enfield. Once he considered asking him for a
traveling pass, which he had never done before, but he
knew that would involve questions about where he intended
to go and why. He could say he was going to see Liza, the
cook at Enfield, but that would let the massa think there was

something between them; and he might mention it to his
parents, and they might mention it to Liza, and then he’d
never hear the end of it, because he knew she had her eye
on him and the feeling was definitely not mutual, so Kunta
dropped the idea.
In his impatience to get back to Enfield, he had begun to
grow irritable with Bell—the more so because he couldn’t
talk with her about it—or so he told himself, knowing all too
well her aversion toward anything African. Thinking about
confiding in the fiddler and the old gardener, he had finally
decided, that although they wouldn’t tell anyone else, they
wouldn’t be able to appreciate the magnitude of meeting
someone to talk to from one’s native land after twenty rains.
Then one Sunday after lunch, without any notice at all, the
massa sent out to have him hitch up the team: He was
going to Enfield. Kunta almost leaped from his seat and out
the door, Bell staring after him in amazement.
Liza was busy among her pots when he entered the
kitchen at Enfield. He asked how she was, adding quickly
that he wasn’t hungry. She looked warmly at him. “Ain’t
seen you in a time,” she said, her voice soft. Then her face
became somber. “Heared ’bout you an’ dat African we
done got. Massa heared, too. Some dem niggers tol’’im,
but he ain’t said nothin’, so I wouldn’ worry ’bout it.” She
grasped and squeezed Kunta’s hand. “You jes’ wait a
minute.”
Kunta felt ready to explode with impatience, but Liza was
deftly making and wrapping two thick beef sandwiches.
She gave them to him, again pressing his hand within hers.
Then she walked him toward the kitchen door, where she
hesitated. “Sump’n you ain’t never ax me, so I ain’t tol’ you
—my mammy was an African nigger. Reckon dat’s how
come I likes you so much.”
Seeing Kunta’s anxiety to leave, she turned abruptly and
pointed, “Dat hut wid de broke chimney his’n. Most de
niggers massa’s let go off today. Dey won’t git back fo’
dark. You jes’ be sho’ you at yo’ buggy fo’ your massa
come out!”
Limping quickly down slave row, Kunta knocked at the

door of the ramshackle one-room hut.
“Who dat?” said the voice he remembered.
“Ah-salakium-salaam!” said Kunta. He heard a quick
muffled movement within, and the door swung open wide.

CHAPTER 61
Since they were Africans, neither man showed how much
this moment had been awaited by both of them. The older
man offered Kunta his only chair, but when he saw that his
guest preferred to squat on the dirt floor as he would have
done in a village back home, the qua-qua player grunted
with satisfaction, lighted the candle on his leaning table,
and squatted down himself.
“I comes from Ghana, an’ mine is de Akan peoples. De
white folks gimme de name Pompey, but my real one’s
Boteng Bediako. I’s been a long time here. Six white folks’
plantations, an’ I hopes dis de las’ one. How ’bout you?”
Trying to copy the Ghanaian’s terse way of speaking,
Kunta told him of The Gambia, of Juffure, of being
Mandinka, of his family, of his capture and escapes, his
foot, doing gardening, and now driving the buggy.
The Ghanaian listened intently, and when Kunta finished,
the Ghanaian sat thinking awhile before he spoke again.
“We’s all sufferin’. A man wise, he try to learn from it.” He
paused and looked appraisingly at Kunta. “How ol’ you is?”
Kunta said thirty-seven rains.
“You ain’t look it. I’s sixty-six.”
“You ain’t look dat neither,” said Kunta.
“Well, I’s been here longer’n you been born. Wishes back
den I could’a knowed sump’n dat I’s learned now. But you
still young, so
I tell it to you. Ol’ gran’mammas in you country, dey tell
young’uns de stories?” Kunta said that they did. “Den I tell
you one. It’s ’bout growin’ up where I come from.
“I ’members how de chief a our Akan peoples use to set
in this big chair made outa elephants’ teeth, an’ it was a
man always held a umbrella over his head. Den ’longside
was de man de chief spoke through. Only way he ever
talked, or anybody could talk to him, was through dis man.
An’ den a boy set at de chief’s feet. Dis boy stood for de
chief’s soul, an’ he run de chief’s messages to de people.

Dis boy run wid a thick-bladed sword, so whoever seed ’im
comin’ knowed ’zactly who he was. I growed up bein’ dat
boy, runnin’ messages ’mongst de peoples. Dat’s how de
white mens cotched me.”
Kunta was about to speak when the Ghanaian held up
his hand.
“Dat ain’t de end a de story. What I’s gittin’ to, on top of
de chief’s umbrella was dis carvin of a hand holdin’ a egg.
Dat stood for de care a chief used his powers wid. An’ dat
man de chief talked through, he always held a staff. An’ on
dat staff a turtle was carved. Turtle stood for dat de key to
livin’ is patience.” The Ghanaian paused. “An’ it was a bee
carved on de shell a dat turtle. Bee stood for dat nothin’
can’t sting through de turtle’s hard shell.”
In the flickering candlelight of the hut, the Ghanaian
paused. “Dis is what I wants to pass on to you, dat I’s
learned in de white folks’ land. What you needs most to live
here is patience—wid a hard shell.”
In Africa, Kunta was sure, this man would have been a
kintango, or an alcala, if not a chief himself. But he didn’t
know how to say what he felt, and just sat there without
saying anything.
“Look like you got both,” said the Ghanaian finally with a
smile. Kunta began to stammer an apology, but his tongue
still seemed to be tied. The Ghanaian smiled again, fell
silent for a moment himself, then spoke again.
“You Mandinkas spoke of in my country as great travelers
an’ traders.” He left the statement in midair, clearly waiting
for Kunta to say something.
At last Kunta found his voice. “You heard right. My uncles
is travelers. Listenin’ to stories dey used to tell, seem like
dey been jus’ ’bout ev’eywhere. Me and my father once, we
went to a new village dey done started a long ways from
Juffure. I was plannin’ to go to Mecca an’ Timbuktu an’ Mali
an’ all like dey done, but I got stole ’fore I had de chance.”
“I knows some ’bout Africa,” said the Ghanaian. “De chief
had me teached by de wise men. I ain’t forgot what dey
said. An’ I’s tried to put it together wid things I’s heared an’
seed since I been here, an’ I knows dat most of us dats

brought here is stole from West Africa—from up roun’ your
Gambia all de way down de coast to my Guinea. Is you
heared of what white folks calls de ‘Gold Coast’?”
Kunta said that he hadn’t. “Dey named it dat ’count of de
gold dere. Dat coast go clear up to de Volta. It’s dat coast
where de white folks cotches de Fanti an’ de Ashanti
peoples. It’s dem Ashantis dats said to lead most of de
uprisins’ an’ revolts when dey’s brought here.
“Spite dat, de white folks pays some of dey biggest
prices for dem, ’cause dey’s smart an’ strong an’ dey’s got
spirit.
“Den what dey calls de ‘Slave Coast’ is where dey gits
de Yorubas an’ Dahomans, an’ roun’ de tip of de Niger dey
gits de Ibo.” Kunta said that he had heard the Ibo were a
gentle people.
The Ghanaian nodded “I’s heared of thirty Ibos joined
hands an’ walked into a river, all singin’, an’ drowned
together. Dat was in Lou’siana.”
Kunta was starting to get worried that the massa might
be ready to leave and he might keep him waiting, and a
moment of silence passed between them. As Kunta’s mind
cast about for some topic appropriate to leave on, the
Ghanaian said, “Sho ain’t nobody here to set an’ talk wid
like us is. Heap a times qua-qua got to say what I got on my
mind. Reckon maybe I was talkin’ to you widout knowin’ you
was dere.”
Deeply moved, Kunta looked the Ghanaian in the eye for
a long moment, and then they both got up. In the candlelight,
Kunta noticed on the table the forgotten two sandwiches
that Liza had given him. He pointed to them and smiled.
“We can eat anytime. Now I knows you got to go,” said the
Ghanaian. “In my country, whilst we was talkin’, I’d a been
carvin’ somethin’ out of a thorn to give you.”
Kunta said that in The Gambia, he would have been
carving something from a large dried mango seed. “Whole
heap of times I done wished I had a mango seed to plant
an’ grow up to remin’ me a home,” he said.
The Ghanaian looked solemnly at Kunta. Then he smiled.
“You’s young. Seeds you’s got a-plenty, you jes’ needs de

wife to plant ’em in.”
Kunta was so embarrassed that he didn’t know how to
reply. The Ghanaian thrust out his left arm, and they shook
their left hands in the African manner, meaning that they
would soon meet again.

“Ah-salakium-salaam.”
“Malaika-salaam.”
And Kunta cripped hurriedly out into the deepening dusk,
past the other small huts, and up toward the big house,
wondering if the massa had already come out looking for
him. But it was another half hour before the massa
appeared, and as Kunta drove the buggy homeward—
scarcely feeling the reins in his hands or hearing the
horses’ hooves on the road—he felt as if he had been
talking with his dear father Omoro. No evening of his life
had ever meant more to him.

CHAPTER 62
“Seen Toby passin’ yestiday, hollered at ’im, ‘Hey, drop by
an’ set awhile, nigger!’ You oughta seen de look he give
me, an’ ain’t even spoke! What you reckon it is?” the fiddler
asked the gardener. The gardener had no idea, and they
both asked Bell. “Cain’t tell. If he sick or sump’n, he oughta
say so. I’m jes’ leavin’ him’lone, he actin’ so funny!” she
declared.
Even Massa Waller noticed that his commendably
reserved and reliable driver seemed not to be his usual
self. He hoped it wasn’t an incubating stage of a current
local contagion to which they both had been exposed, so
one day he asked Kunta if he felt badly. “Nawsuh,” Kunta
quickly replied, so Massa Waller put further concern out of
his mind, so long as his driver got him where he was going.
Kunta had been rocked to the core by his encounter with
the Ghanaian, and that very fact made it clear to him how
lost he had become. Day by day, year by year, he had
become less resisting, more accepting, until finally, without
even realizing it, he had forgotten who he was. It was true
that he had come to know better and learned to get along
with the fiddler, the gardener, Bell, and the other blacks, but
he knew now that he could never really be one of them, any
more than they could be like him. Alongside the Ghanaian,
in fact, the fiddler and the gardener and Bell now seemed
to Kunta only irritating. He was glad that they were keeping
their distance. Lying on his pallet at night, he was torn with
guilt and shame about what he had let happen to himself.
He had still been an African when he used to awaken
suddenly here in his cabin, jerking upright, shocked to
discover that he wasn’t in Juffure; but the last time that
happened had been many years ago. He had still been an
African when his memories of The Gambia and its people
had been the only thing that sustained him, but months
might pass now without his having a single thought about
Juffure. He had still been an African back in those early

years when each new outrage had sent him onto his knees
imploring Allah to give him strength and understanding; how
long had it been since he had even properly prayed to
Allah?
His learning to speak the toubob tongue, he realized, had
played a big part in it. In this everyday talking, he seldom
even thought of Mandinka words any more, excepting those
few that for some reason his mind still clung to. Indeed, by
now—Kunta grimly faced it—he even thought in the toubob
tongue. In countless things he did as well as said and
thought, his Mandinka ways had slowly been replaced by
those of the blacks he had been among. The only thing in
which he felt he could take some small pride was that in
twenty rains he had never touched the meat of the swine.
Kunta searched his mind; there must have been
something else of his original self that he could find
someplace. And there was: He had kept his dignity.
Through everything, he had worn his dignity as once in
Juffure he had worn his saphie charms to keep away the
evil spirits. He vowed to himself that now more than ever,
his dignity must become as a shield between him and all of
those who called themselves “niggers.” How ignorant of
themselves they were; they knew nothing of their ancestors,
as he had been taught from boyhood. Kunta reviewed in his
mind the names of the Kintes from the ancient clan in old
Mali down across the generations in Mauretania, then in
The Gambia all the way to his brothers and himself; and he
thought of how the same ancestral knowledge was
possessed by every member of his kafo.
It set Kunta to reminiscing about those boyhood friends.
At first he was only surprised, but then he grew shocked
when he found that he couldn’t remember their names.
Their faces came back to him—along with memories of
them racing out beyond the village gate like blackbirds to
serve as chattering escorts in Juffure for every traveler who
passed by; hurling sticks at the scolding monkeys
overhead, who promptly hurled them back; of contests
they’d held to see who could eat six mangoes the fastest.
But try as Kunta might, he couldn’t recall their names, not

one of them. He could see his kafo gathered, frowning at
him.
In his hut, and driving the massa, Kunta racked his brain.
And finally the names did begin to come, one by one: yes,
Sitafa Silla—he and Kunta had been best friends! And
Kalilu Conteh—he had stalked and caught the parrot at the
kintango’s command. Sefo Kela—he had asked the
Council of Elders for permission to have a teriya sexual
friendship with that widow.
The faces of some of the elders began to come back
now, and with them the names he thought he had long since
forgotten. The kintango was Silla Ba Dibba! The alimamo
was Kujali Demba! The wadanela was Karamo Tamba!
Kunta remembered his third-kafo graduating ceremony,
where he had read his Koranic verses so well that Omoro
and Binta gave a fat goat to the arafang, whose name was
Brima Cesay. Remembering them all filled Kunta with joy—
until it occurred to him that those elders would have died by
now, and his kafo mates whom he remembered as little
boys would be his age back in Juffure—and he would never
see them again. For the first time in many years, he cried
himself to sleep.
In the county seat a few days later, another buggy driver
told Kunta that some free blacks up North who called
themselves “The Negro Union” had proposed a mass return
to Africa of all blacks—both free and slaves. The very
thought of it excited Kunta, even as he scoffed that it
couldn’t ever happen, with massas not only competing to
buy blacks but also paying higher prices than ever. Though
he knew the fiddler would almost rather stay a slave in
Virginia than go to Africa a free man, Kunta wished he
could discuss it with him, for the fiddler always seemed to
know all there was to know about what was going on
anywhere if it had anything to do with freedom.
But for almost two months now Kunta hadn’t done more
than scowl at the fiddler or at Bell and the gardener either.
Not that he needed them or even liked them that much, of
course—but the feeling of being stranded kept growing
within him. By the time the next new moon rose, and he

miserably dropped another pebble into his gourd, he was
feeling inexpressibly lonely, as if he had cut himself off from
the world.
The next time Kunta saw the fiddler pass by, he nodded
at him uncertainly, but the fiddler kept walking as if he
hadn’t even seen anyone. Kunta was furiously
embarrassed. The very next day he and the old gardener
saw each other at the same moment, and without missing a
step, the gardener turned in another direction. Both hurt and
bitter—and with a mounting sense of guilt—Kunta paced
back and forth in his hut for more hours that night. The next
morning, bracing himself, he cripped outside and down
slave row to the door of the once-familiar last hut. He
knocked.
The door opened. “What you want?” the fiddler asked
coldly.
Swallowing with embarrassment, Kunta said, “Jes’
figgered I’d come by.”
The fiddler spat on the ground. “Look here, nigger, now
hear what I tells you. Me an’ Bell an’ de ol’ man been
’scussin’ you. An’ we all ’grees if it’s anythin’ we can’t stan’,
it’s a sometimey nigger!” He glared at Kunta. “Dat’s all
been wrong wid you! You ain’t sick or nothin’. ”
Kunta stood looking at his shoes. After a moment, the
fiddler’s glare softened and he stepped aside. “Since you’s
already here, c’mon in. But I’m gon’ tell you—show yo’ ass
one mo’ time, an’ you won’t git spoke to again ’til you’s ol’
as Methuselah!”
Choking down his rage and humiliation, Kunta went on
inside and sat down, and after a seemingly endless silence
between them—which the fiddler obviously had no intention
of ending—Kunta forced himself to tell about the back-toAfrica proposal. The fiddler said coolly that he had long
known about that, and that there wasn’t a snowball’s
chance in hell that it would ever happen.
Seeing Kunta’s hurt expression, the fiddler seemed to
relent a little. “Lemme tell you sump’n I bets you ain’t
heared. Up Nawth in New York, dey’s what you call a
Manumission Society dat done open a school for free

niggers what wants to get learned readin’ an’ writin’ an’ all
kin’s a trades.”
Kunta was so happy and relieved to have the fiddler
talking to him again that he hardly heard what his old friend
was saying to him. A few minutes later, the fiddler stopped
talking for a moment and sat looking at Kunta inquiringly.
“Is I keepin’ you up?” he asked finally.
“Hmm?” said Kunta, who had been lost in thought.
“I ax you a question ’bout five minutes ago.”
“Sorry, I was thinkin’ ’bout sump’n.”
“Well, since you don’ know how to listen, I show ya how
its done.” He sat back and crossed his arms.
“Ain’t you gonna go on wid what you was sayin’?” asked
Kunta.
“By now I forgits what I was sayin’. Is you forgit what you
was thinkin’?”
“It ain’t impo’tant. Jes’ sump’n been on my mind.”
“Better get it off dere fo’ you gits a headache—or gives
me one.”
“I cain’t ’scuss it.”
“Huh!” said the fiddler, acting insulted. “If’n dat de way
you feel . . . ”
“Ain’t you. It’s jes’ too personal.”
A light began to dawn in the fiddler’s eye. “Don’ tell me!
It’s’bout a woman, right?”
“Ain’t nothin’ a de kin’!” said Kunta, flushing with
embarrassment. He sat speechless for a moment, then got
up and said, “Well, I be late fo’ work, so I see ya later.
Thanks fo’ talkin’ wid me.”
“Sho thing. Jes’ lemme know when you wants to do
some talkin’.”
How had he known? Kunta asked himself on his way to
the stable. And why had he insisted on making him talk
about it? It was only with the greatest reluctance that Kunta
had even let himself think about it. But lately he could hardly
seem to think about anything else. It had to do with the
Ghanaian’s advice about planting his seeds.

CHAPTER 63
Long before he met the Ghanaian, Kunta had often had a
hollow feeling whenever he thought about the fact that if he
had been in Juffure, he would have had three or four sons
by now—along with the wife who had given birth to them.
What usually occasioned these thoughts was when about
once each moon, Kunta had a dream from which he always
awakened abruptly in the darkness, acutely embarrassed
at the hot stickiness that had just burst from his still rigid
foto. Lying awake afterward, he thought not so much of a
wife as he did about how he knew that there was hardly a
slave row where some man and woman who cared for one
another had not simply begun living together in whichever’s
hut was the better one.
There were many reasons why Kunta didn’t want to think
about getting married. For one thing, it seemed to involve
the couple’s “jumpin’ de broomstick” before witnesses from
slave row, which seemed ridiculous to Kunta for such a
solemn occasion. In a few cases he had heard of, certain
favored house servants might repeat their vows before
some white preacher with the massa and mistress looking
on, but that was a pagan ceremony. If marrying someone in
whatever manner was even to be thought about, the proper
bride’s age for a Mandinka was fourteen to sixteen rains,
with the man about thirty. And in his years in the white folks’
land, Kunta hadn’t seen one black female of fourteen to
sixteen—or even twenty to twenty-five—whom he had not
considered preposterously giggling and silly; especially
when on Sundays, or for festivities, they painted and
powdered their faces until they looked to him more like the
death dancers in Juffure who covered themselves with
ashes.
As for the twenty or so older women whom Kunta had
come to know, they were mostly senior cooks at the big
houses where he had driven Massa Waller, such as Liza at
Enfield. In fact, Liza was the only one among them all whom

he had come to look forward to seeing. She had no mate,
and she had given Kunta clear signs of her willingness, if
not her anxiety, to get him into much closer quarters than he
had ever responded to, although he had thought about it
privately. He would have died of shame if there had been
any way for her to suspect even remotely that more than
once it had been she about whom he had had the sticky
dream.
Suppose—just suppose—he were to take Liza for a wife,
Kunta thought. It would mean that they would be like so
many couples he knew, living separately, each of them on
the plantation of their own massa. Usually the man was
permitted Saturday afternoon traveling passes to visit his
wife, so long as he faithfully returned before dark on Sunday
in order to rest up from his often long trip before work
resumed at dawn on Monday. Kunta told himself that he
would want no part of a wife living not where he was. And
he told himself that settled the matter.
But his mind, as if on its own, kept on thinking about it.
Considering how talkative and smothery Liza was, and how
he liked to spend a lot of time alone, maybe their being
able to see each other just on weekends would be a
blessing in disguise. And if he were to marry Liza, it was
unlikely that they would have to live as so many black
couples did, in fear that one of them, or both, might get sold
away. For the massa seemed to be happy with him, and
Liza was owned by the massa’s parents, who apparently
liked her. The family connections would also make unlikely
the kind of frictions that sometimes arose when two
massas were involved, sometimes even causing one or
both of them to forbid the marriage.
On the other hand, Kunta thought ... over and over he
turned it in his mind. But no matter how many perfectly
sound reasons he could think of for marrying Liza,
something held him back. Then one night, while he was
lying in bed trying to fall asleep, it struck him like a lightning
bolt!—there was another woman he might consider.
Bell.
He thought he must be crazy. She was nearly three times

too old—probably beyond forty rains. It was absurd to think
about it.
Bell.
Kunta tried to hurl her from his mind. She had entered it
only because he had known her for so long, he told himself.
He had never even dreamed of her. Grimly, he
remembered a parade of indignities and irritations she had
inflicted on him. He remembered how she used to all but
slam the screen door in his face when he carried her
vegetable basket to the kitchen. Even more keenly, he
remembered her indignation when he told her she looked
Mandinka; she was a heathen. Furthermore, she was just
generally argumentative and bossy. And she talked too
much.
But he couldn’t help remembering how, when he had lain
wanting to die, she had visited him five and six times daily;
how she had nursed and fed him, even cleaned his soiling
of himself, and how her hot poultice of mashed leaves had
broken his fever. She was also strong and healthy. And she
did cook endless good things in her black pots.
The better she began to look to him, the ruder he was to
her whenever he had to go to the kitchen, and the sooner
he would leave when he had told her or found out from her
whatever he had come for. She began to stare at his
retreating back even more coldly than before.
One day after he had been talking for some time with the
gardener and the fiddler and worked the conversation very
slowly around to Bell, it seemed to Kunta that he had just
the right tone of casualness in his voice when he asked,
“Where she was fo’ she come here?” But his heart sank
when they instantly sat up straighter and looked at him,
sensing something in the air.
“Well,” the gardener said after a minute, “I ’members she
come here ’bout two years fo’ you. But she ain’t never done
much talkin’’bout herself. So ain’t much I knows more’n you
does—.”
The fiddler said Bell had never spoken of her past to him
either. Kunta couldn’t put his finger on what it was about
their expressions that irritated him. Yes, he could: It was

smugness.
The fiddler scratched his right ear. “Sho’ is funny you ax
’bout Bell,” he said, nodding in the gardener’s direction,
“’cause me’n him ain’t been long back ’scussin’ y’all.” He
looked carefully at Kunta.
“We was sayin’ seem like y’all both might be jes’ what de
other’n needs,” said the gardener.
Outraged, Kunta sat with his mouth open, only nothing
came out.
Still scratching his ear, the fiddler wore a sly look. “Yeah,
her big behin’ be too much to handle for most mens.”
Kunta angrily started to speak, but the gardener cut him
off, demanding sharply, “Listen here, how long you ain’t
touched no woman?”
Kunta glared daggers. “Twenty years anyhow!”
exclaimed the fiddler.
“Lawd, Gawd!” said the gardener. “You better git you
some ’fo’ you dries up!”
“If he ain’t a-reddy!” the fiddler shot in. Unable to speak
but able to contain himself a moment longer, Kunta leaped
up and stamped out. “Don’ you worry!” the fiddler shouted
after him. “You ain’t gon’ stay dry long wid her!”

CHAPTER 64
For the next few days, whenever Kunta wasn’t off driving the
massa somewhere, he spent both his mornings and
afternoons oiling and polishing the buggy. Since he was
right outside the barn in any one’s view, it couldn’t be said
that he was isolating himself again, but at the same time it
said that his work was keeping him too busy to spend time
talking with the fiddler and the gardener—at whom he was
still furious for what they had said about him and Bell.
Being off by himself also gave him more time to sort out
his feelings for her. Whenever he was thinking of something
he didn’t like about her, his polishing rag would become a
furious blur against the leather; and whenever he was
feeling better about her, it would move slowly and
sensuously across the seats, sometimes almost stopping
as his mind lingered on some disarming quality of hers.
Whatever her shortcomings, he had to admit that she had
done a great deal in his best interests over the years. He
felt certain that Bell had even played a quiet role in the
massa’s having selected him as his buggy driver. There
was no question that in her own subtle ways, Bell had more
influence on the massa than anyone else on the plantation,
or probably all of them put together. And a parade of
smaller things came and went through Kunta’s mind. He
remembered a time back when he was gardening and Bell
had noticed that he was often rubbing at his eyes, which
had been itching him in a maddening way. Without a word,
she had come out to the garden one morning with some
wide leaves still wet with dewdrops, which she shook into
his eyes, whereupon the itching had soon stopped.
Not that he felt any less strongly about the things he
disapproved of in Bell, Kunta reminded himself as the rag
picked up speed—most particularly her disgusting habit of
smoking tobacco in a pipe. Even more objectionable was
her way of dancing whenever there was some festivity
among the blacks. He didn’t feel that women shouldn’t

dance, or do so less than enthusiastically. What bothered
him was that Bell seemed to go out of her way to make her
behind shake in a certain manner, which he figured was the
reason the fiddler and the gardener had said what they did
about her. Bell’s behind, of course, wasn’t any of his
business, he just wished she would show a little more
respect for herself—and while she was at it, a little more
toward him and other men. Her tongue, it seemed to him,
was even worse than old Nyo Boto’s. He wouldn’t mind her
being critical if she’d only keep it to herself, or do her
criticizing in the company of other women, as it was done in
Juffure.
When Kunta had finished with the buggy, he began
cleaning and oiling the leather harnesses, and for some
reason as he did so, his mind went back to the old men in
Juffure who carved things from wood such as the knee-high
slab of hickory on which he was sitting. He thought how
carefully they would first select and then study some
thoroughly seasoned piece of wood before they would ever
touch it with their adzes and their knives.
Kunta got up and toppled the hickory block over on its
side, sending the beetles that lived beneath it scurrying
away. After closely examining both ends of the block, he
rolled it back and forth, tapping it with the piece of iron at
different places, and always hearing the same solid,
seasoned sound. It seemed to him that this excellent piece
of wood was serving no real purpose just sitting here. It was
there apparently only because someone had put it there
long before and no one had ever bothered to move it.
Looking around to make sure no one was watching, Kunta
rolled the block rapidly to his hut, where he stood it upright
in a corner, closed the door, and went back to work.
That night, after bringing the massa back from a trip to
the county seat that seemed to take forever, Kunta couldn’t
sit through supper before getting another look at the hickory
block, so he took the food along with him to his cabin. Not
even noticing what he was eating, Kunta sat on the floor in
front of it and studied it in the light from the flickering candle
on his table. In his mind, he was seeing the mortar and

pestle that Omoro had carved for Binta, who had worn it
slick with many grindings of her corn.
Merely to pass away some of his free time, Kunta told
himself, when Massa Waller didn’t want to go anywhere,
Kunta began to chop away at the block with a sharp
hatchet, making a rough shape of the outside rim of a
mortar for grinding corn. By the third day, with a hammer
and a wood chisel, he dug out the mortar’s inside, also
roughly, and then he began to carve with a knife. After a
week, Kunta’s fingers surprised him at how nimbly they
flew, considering that he hadn’t watched the old men in his
village carving things for more than twenty rains.
When he had finished the inside and the outside of the
mortar, he found a seasoned hickory limb, perfectly straight
and of the thickness of his arm, from which he soon made a
pestle. Then he set about smoothing the upper part of the
handle, scraping it first with a file, next with a knife, and
finally with a piece of glass.
Finished, they both sat in a corner of Kunta’s hut for two
more weeks. He would look at them now and then,
reflecting that they wouldn’t look out of place in his mother’s
kitchen. But now that he had made them, he was unsure
what to do with them; at least that’s what he told himself.
Then one morning, without really thinking about why he was
doing it, Kunta picked them up and took them along when
he went to check with Bell to see if the massa was going to
need the buggy. When she gave him her brief, cold report
from behind the screen door, saying that the massa had no
travel plans that morning, Kunta waited until her back was
turned and found himself setting the mortar and pestle
down on the steps and turning to leave as fast as he could
go. When Bell’s ears caught the gentle thumping sound,
which made her turn around, she first saw Kunta cripping
away even more hurriedly than usual, then she saw the
mortar and pestle on the steps.
Walking to the door, she peered out at Kunta until he had
disappeared, then eased the screen door open and looked
down at them; she was flabbergasted. Picking them up and
bringing them inside, she examined its painstaking carving

with astonishment; and then she began to cry.
It was the first time in her twenty-two years on the Waller
plantation that any man had made something for her with
his own hands. She felt flooding guilt for the way she had
been acting toward Kunta, and she remembered how
peculiar the fiddler and the gardener had acted recently
when she complained to them about him. They must have
known of this—but she couldn’t be certain, knowing how
close-mouthed and reserved Kunta could be in his African
way.
Bell was confused about how she should feel—or how
she should act the next time he came to check on the
massa again after lunch. She was glad she would have at
least the rest of the morning to get her mind made up about
that. Kunta, meanwhile, sat in his cabin feeling as if he were
two people, one of them completely humiliated by the
foolish and ridiculous thing the other one had just done—
and felt almost deliriously happy and excited about it. What
made him do it? What would she think? He dreaded having
to return to the kitchen after lunch.
Finally the hour came, and Kunta trudged up the walk as
if he were going to his execution. When he saw that the
mortar and pestle were gone from the back steps, his heart
leaped and sank at the same time. Reaching the screen
door, he saw that she had put them on the floor just inside,
as if she were uncertain why Kunta had left them there.
Turning when he knocked—as if she hadn’t heard him
coming—she tried to look calm as she unlatched the door
and opened it for him to come on in. That was a bad sign,
thought Kunta; she hadn’t opened the door to him in
months. But he wanted to come in; yet he couldn’t seem to
take that first step. Rooted where he stood, he asked
matter-of-factly about the massa, and Bell, concealing her
hurt feelings and her confusion, managed to reply just as
matter-of-factly that the massa said he had no afternoon
plans for the buggy either. As Kunta turned to go, she
added hopefully, “He been writin’ letters all day.” All of the
possible things that Bell had thought of that she might say
had fled her head, and as he turned again to go, she heard

herself blurting “What dat?” with a gesture toward the
mortar and pestle.
Kunta wished that he were anywhere else on earth. But
finally he replied, almost angrily, “For you to grin’ cawn wid.”
Bell looked at him with her mingled emotions now clearly
showing on her face. Seizing the silence between them as
an excuse to leave, Kunta turned and hurried away without
another word. Bell stood there feeling like a fool.
For the next two weeks, beyond exchanging greeetings,
neither of them said anything to each other. Then one day,
at the kitchen door, Bell gave Kunta a round cake of
cornbread. Mumbling his thanks, he took it back to his hut
and ate it still hot from the pan and soaked with butter. He
was deeply moved. Almost certainly she had made it with
meal ground in the mortar he had given her. But even
before this he had decided that he was going to have a talk
with Bell. When he checked in with her after lunch, he
forced himself to say, as he had carefully rehearsed and
memorized it, “I wants a word wid you after supper.” Bell
didn’t delay her response overlong. “Don’t make me no
difference,” she said too quickly, regretting it.
By suppertime, Kunta had worked himself into a state.
Why had she said what she did? Was she really as
indifferent as she seemed? And if she was, why did she
make the cornbread for him? He would have it out with her.
But neither he nor Bell had remembered to say exactly
when or where they would meet. She must have intended
for him to meet her at her cabin, he decided finally. But he
hoped desperately that some emergency medical call
would come for Massa Waller. When none did, and he
knew he couldn’t put it off any longer, he took a deep
breath, opened his cabin door, and strolled casually over to
the barn. Coming back outside swinging in his hand a set
of harnesses that he figured would satisfy the curiosity of
anyone who might happen to see him and wonder why he
was out and around, he ambled on down to slave row to
Bell’s cabin and—looking around to make sure no one was
around—knocked very quietly on the door.
It opened almost before his knuckles touched the wood,

and Bell stepped immediately outside. Glancing down at
the harness, and then at Kunta, she said nothing—and
when he didn’t either, she began to walk slowly down
toward the back fencerow; he fell into step beside her. The
half moon had begun to rise, and in its pale light they
moved along without a word. When a groundvine entangled
the shoe on his left foot, Kunta stumbled—his shoulder
brushing against Bell—and he all but sprang away.
Ransacking his brain for something—anything—to say, he
wished wildly that he was walking with the gardener or the
fiddler, or practically anyone except Bell.
Finally it was she who broke the silence. She said
abruptly, “De white folks done swore in dat Gen’l
Washington for de Pres’dent.” Kunta wanted to ask her
what that was, but he didn’t, hoping that she’d keep on
talking. “An’ it’s annuder massa name of John Adams is
Vice Pres’dent,” she went on.
Floundering, he felt that he must say something to keep
the talk going. He said finally, “Rode massa over to see his
brother’s young’un yestiddy,” instantly feeling foolish, as he
knew full well that Bell already knew that.
“Lawd, he do love dat chile!” Bell said, feeling foolish,
since that’s about all she ever said about little Missy Anne
whenever the subject came up. The silence had built up a
little bit again when she went on. “Don’t know how much you
knows ’bout massa’s brother. He de Spotsylvania County
clerk, but he ain’t never had our massa’s head fo’ binness.”
Bell was quiet for a few more steps. “I keeps my ears sharp
on little things gits dropped. I knows whole lot more’n
anybody thinks I knows.”
She glanced over at Kunta. “I ain’t never had no use for
dat Massa John—an’ I’s sure you ain’t neither—but dere’s
sump’n you ought to know ’bout him dat I ain’t never tol’ you.
It weren’t him had your foot cut off. Fact, he pitched a fit wid
dem low-down po’ white trash what done it. He’d hired ’em
to track you wid dey nigger dogs, an’ dey claim how come
dey done it was you tried to kill one of ’em wid a rock.” Bell
paused. “I ’members it like yestiddy when Sheriff Brock
come a-rushin’ you to our massa.” Under the moonlight,

Bell looked at Kunta. “You near ’bout dead, massa said. He
got so mad when Massa John say he ain’t got no use for
you no more wid your foot gone, he swore he gon’ buy you
from him, an’ he done it, too. I seen de very deed he bought
you wid. He took over a good-sized farm long wid you in de
place of money his brother owed him. It’s dat big farm wid
de pond right where de big road curve, you passes it all de
time.”
Kunta knew the farm instantly. He could see the pond in
his mind, and the surrounding fields. “But dey business
dealin’s don’t make no difference, ’cause all dem Wallers
is very close,” Bell continued. “Dey’s ’mongst de oldes’
families in Virginia. Fact, dey was ol’ family in dat England
even fo’ day come crost de water to here. Was all kinds of
‘Sirs’ an’ stuff, all b’longin’ to de Church of England. Was
one of dem what writ poems, name of Massa Edmund
Waller. His younger brother Massa John Waller was de one
what comes here first. He weren’t but eighteen, I’s heared
massa say, when some King Charles de Secon’ give him a
big lan’ grant over where Kent County is now.”
Their pace had become much slower as Bell talked, and
Kunta couldn’t have been more pleased with Bell’s steady
talking, although he had already heard from some other
Waller family cooks at least some of the things she was
saying, though he never would have told her that.
“Anyhow, dis John Waller married a Miss Mary Key, an’
dey built de Enfield big house where you takes massa to
see his folks. An’ dey had three boys, ’specially John de
Secon’, de younges’, who come to be a whole heap of
things—read de law while he was a sheriff, den was in de
House of Burgesses, an’ he helped to found
Fredericksburg an’ to put together Spotsylvania County. It
was him an’ his Missis Dorothy what built Newport, an’ dey
had six young’uns. An’ co’se out of all dem, it commence to
be Waller chilluns spreadin’ all over, an’ growin’ on up, an’
havin’ young’uns of dey own. Our massa an’ de other
Wallers what lives roun’ here ain’t but a han’ful of ’em all.
Dey’s all pretty much high-respected peoples, too, sheriffs
an’ preachers, county clerks, House of Burgesses, doctors

like massa; whole heap of ’em fought in de Revolution, an’ I
don’t know what all.”
Kunta had become so absorbed in what Bell was saying
that he was startled when she stopped walking. “We better
git on back,” she said. “Traipsin’ out here till all hours
’mongst dese weeds, be oversleepin’ in de mornin’.” They
turned around, and when Bell was quiet for a minute, and
Kunta didn’t say anything, she realized that he wasn’t going
to tell her whatever he had on his mind, so she went on
chattering about whatever came into her mind until they got
back to her cabin, where she turned to face him and fell
silent. He stood there looking at her for a long, agonizing
moment, and then finally he spoke: “Well, it gettin’ late like
you said. So I see you tomorra.” As he walked away, still
carrying the harnesses, Bell realized that he hadn’t told her
whatever it was that he wanted to talk to her about. Well,
she told herself—afraid to think that it might be what she
thought it was—he’ll get around to it in his own time.
It was just as well that she wasn’t in a hurry, for though
Kunta began to spend a lot of time in Bell’s kitchen as she
went about her work, she found herself, as usual, doing
most of the talking. But she liked having him there to listen.
“I foun’ out,” she told him one day, “dat massa done writ out
a will that if he die an’ ain’t got married, his slaves gon’ go
to little Missy Anne. But de will say if he do marry, den he
wife would git us slaves when he die.” Even so, Bell didn’t
seem to be unduly disturbed. “Sho’ is a plenty of ’em roun’
here would love to grab de massa, but he ain’t never
married no mo’.” She paused. “Jes’ de same as I ain’t.”
Kunta almost dropped the fork from his hand. He was
positive that he had heard Bell correctly, and he was jolted
to know that Bell had been married before, for it was
unthinkable that a desirable wife should not be a virgin.
Kunta soon was out of the kitchen and gone into his own
cabin. He knew that he must think hard upon this matter.
Two weeks of silence had passed before Bell casually
invited Kunta to eat supper with her in her cabin that night.
He was so astounded that he didn’t know what to say. He
had never been alone in a hut with a woman other than his

own mother or grandmother. It wouldn’t be right. But when
he couldn’t find the words to speak, she told him what time
to show up, and that was that.
He scrubbed himself in a tin tub from head to foot, using
a rough cloth and a bar of brown lye soap. Then he
scrubbed himself again, and yet a third time. Then he dried
himself, and while he was putting on his clothes, he found
himself singing softly a song from his village, “Mandumbe,
your long neck is very beautiful—.” Bell didn’t have a long
neck, nor was she beautiful, but he had to admit to himself
that when he was around her, he had a good feeling. And
he knew that she felt the same.
Bell’s cabin was the biggest one on the plantation, and
the one nearest to the big house, with a small bed of
flowers growing before it. Knowing her kitchen, her cabin’s
immaculate neatness was no more than Kunta would
expect. The room he entered when she opened the door
had a feeling of cozy comfort, with its wall of mud-chinked
logs and a chimney of homemade bricks that widened
down from the roof to her large fireplace, alongside which
hung her shining cooking utensils. And Kunta noticed that
instead of the usual one room with one window, such as he
had, Bell’s cabin had two rooms and two windows, both
covered with shutters that she could pull down in case of
rain, or when it grew cold. The curtained rear room was
obviously where she slept, and Kunta kept his eyes averted
from that doorway. On her oblong table in the center of the
room he was in, there were knives and forks and spoons
standing in ajar, and some flowers from her garden in
another, and two lighted candles were sitting in squat clay
holders, and at either end of the table was a high-backed,
cane-bottomed chair.
Bell asked him to sit in a rocking chair that was nearer
the fireplace. He did, sitting down carefully; for he had never
been in one of these contraptions before, but was trying
hard to act casual about the whole visit as Bell seemed to
be.
“I been so busy I ain’t even lit de fire,” she said, and
Kunta all but leaped up out of the chair, glad to have

something he could do with his hands. Striking the flint
sharply against the piece of iron, he lighted the fluffy cotton
that Bell had already placed under fat pinesticks beneath
the oak logs, and quickly they caught fire.
“Don’t know how come I ax you to come here nohow,
place in a mess, an’ I ain’t got nothin’ ready,” Bell said,
bustling about her pots.
“Ain’t no hurry wid me,” Kunta made himself respond. But
her already cooked chicken with dumplings, which she well
knew that Kunta loved, was soon bubbling. And when she
had served him, she chided him for gobbling so. But Kunta
didn’t quit until the third helping, with Bell insisting that there
was still a little more in the pot.
“Naw, I’s fit to bus’,” said Kunta truthfully. And after a few
more minutes of small talk, he got up and said he had to
get on home. Pausing in the doorway, he looked at Bell,
and Bell looked at him, and neither of them said anything,
and then Bell turned her eyes away, and Kunta cripped on
down along slave row to his own cabin.
He awakened more lighthearted than he had felt since
leaving Africa—but he told no one why he was acting so
uncharacteristically cheerful and outgoing. But he hardly
needed to. Word began to get around that Kunta had
actually been seen smiling and even laughing in Bell’s
kitchen. And at first every week or so, then twice a week,
Bell would invite Kunta home for supper. Though he thought
that once in a while he should make some excuse, he could
never bring himself to say no. And always Bell cooked
things Kunta had let her know were also grown in The
Gambia, such as black-eyed peas, okra, a stew made of
peanuts, or yams baked with butter.
Most of their conversations were still one-sided, but
neither one seemed to mind. Her favorite topic, of course,
was Massa Waller, and it never ceased to amaze Kunta
how much Bell knew that he didn’t about the man he spent
so much more time with than she did.
“Massa funny ’bout different, things,” Bell said. “Like he
believe in banks, all right enough, but he keep money hid,
too; nobody else don’t know where but me. He funny ’bout

his niggers, too. He do ’bout anything for ’em, but if one
mess up, he’ll sell ’im jes’ like he done Luther.
“’Nother thing massa funny ’bout,” Bell went on. “He won’t
have a yaller nigger on his place. You ever notice, ceptin’
fo’ de fiddler, ain’t nothin’ here but black niggers? Massa
tell anybody jes’ what he think ’bout it, too. I done heared
’im tellin’ some of de biggest mens in dis county, I mean
ones dat got plenty yaller niggers deyselves, dat too many
white mens is havin’ slave chilluns, so dey ain’t doin’ nothin’
but buyin’ an’ sellin’ dey own blood, an’ it need to be
stopped.”
Though he never showed it, and he kept up a steady
drone of “uh-huh’s” when Bell was talking, Kunta would
sometimes listen with one ear while he thought about
something else. Once when she cooked him a hoe cake,
using meal she had made in the mortar and pestle he had
carved for her, Kunta was watching her in his mind’s eye
beating the couscous for breakfast in some African village
while she stood at the stove telling him that hoe cakes got
their name from slaves cooking them on the flat edge of a
hoe when they were working out in the fields.
Now and then Bell even gave Kunta some special dish to
take to the fiddler and the gardener. He wasn’t seeing as
much of them as he had, but they seemed to understand,
and the time they spent apart even seemed to increase the
pleasure of conversation with them whenever they got
together. Though he never discussed Bell with them—and
they never brought her up—it was clear from their
expressions that they knew she and he were courtin’ as well
as if their meetings took place on the front lawn. Kunta
found this vaguely embarrassing, but there seemed to be
nothing he could do about it—not that he particularly cared
to.
He was more concerned that there remained some
serious matters he wanted to take up with Bell, but he never
could quite seem to get around to them. Among them was
the fact that she kept on her front-room wall a large, framed
picture of the yellow-haired “Jesus,” who seemed to be a
relative of their heathen “O Lawd.” But finally he did

manage to mention it, and Bell promptly said, “Ain’t but two
places everybody’s headin’ for, heab’n or hell, and where
you goin’, dat’s yo’ business!” And she would say no more
about it. Her reply discomfited him every time he thought of
it, but finally he decided that she had a right to her beliefs,
however misguided; just as he had a right to his. Unshaken,
he had been born with Allah and he was going to die with
Allah—although he hadn’t been praying to Him regularly
again ever since he started seeing a lot of Bell. He
resolved to correct that and hoped that Allah would forgive
him.
Anyway, he couldn’t feel too harshly about someone,
even a pagan Christian, who was so good to one of
another faith, even someone as worthy as he was. She was
so nice to him, in fact, that Kunta wanted to do something
special for her—something at least as special as the
mortar and pestle. So one day when he was on his way
over to Massa John’s to pick up Missy Anne for a weekend
visit with Massa Waller, Kunta stopped off by a fine patch of
bulrushes he had often noticed, and picked some of the
best he could find. With the rushes split into fine pieces,
and with some selected, soft inner white cornshucks, over
the next several days he plaited an intricate mat with a bold
Mandinka design in its center. It came out even better than
he had expected, and he presented it to Bell the next time
she had him over for supper. She looked upward from the
mat to Kunta. “Ain’t nobody gon’ put dey feets on dat!” she
exclaimed, turning and disappearing into her bedroom.
Back a few moments later with a hand behind her, she
said, “Dis was gonna be for yo’ Christmas, but I make you
somethin’ else.”
She held out her hand. It was a pair of finely knitted
woolen socks—one of them with a half foot, the front part
filled with soft woolen cushion. Neither he nor Bell seemed
to know what to say.
He could smell the aroma of the food she had been
simmering, ready to be served, but a strange feeling was
sweeping over him as they kept on looking at each other.
Bell’s hand suddenly grasped his, and with a single motion

she blew out both of the candles and swiftly with Kunta
feeling as if he were a leaf being borne by a rushing
stream, they went together through the curtained doorway
into the other room and lay down facing one another on the
bed. Looking deeply into his eyes, she reached out to him,
they drew together, and for the first time in the thirty-nine
rains of his life, he held a woman in his arms.

CHAPTER 65
“Massa ain’t want to believe me when I tol’ ’im,” Bell said
toto Kunta. “But he finally say he feel us ought to think on it
for a spell yet, ’cause peoples gittin’ married is sacred in
de eyes of Jesus.” To Kunta, however, Massa Waller said
not a word about it during the next few weeks. Then one
night Bell came running out to Kunta’s cabin and reported
breathlessly, “I done tol’ ’im we still wants to marry, an’ he
say, well, den, he reckon it’s awright!”
The news coursed swiftly through slave row. Kunta was
embarrassed as different ones offered their
congratulations. He could have choked Bell for telling even
Missy Anne when she came next to visit her uncle, for the
first thing she did after finding out was race about
screaming, “Bell gon’ git married! Bell gon’ git married!”
Yet at the same time, deep inside himself, Kunta felt that it
was improper for him to feel any displeasure at such an
announcement, since the Mandinka people considered
marriage to be the most important thing after birth itself.
Bell somehow managed to get the massa’s promise not
to use the buggy—or Kunta—for the entire Sunday before
Christmas, when everyone would be off work and therefore
available to attend the wedding. “I knows you don’t want no
marriage in de big house,” she told Kunta, “like we could of
had if I’d of asked massa. And I knows he don’t really want
dat neither, so at leas’ y’all togedder on dat.” She arranged
for it to be held in the front yard alongside the oval flower
garden.
Everybody on slave row was there in their Sunday best,
and standing together on across from them were Massa
Waller with little Missy Anne and her parents. But as far as
Kunta was concerned, the guest of honor—and, in a very
real sense, the one responsible for the whole thing—was
his friend the Ghanaian, who had hitched a ride all the way
from Enfield just to be there. As Kunta walked with Bell out
into the center of the yard, he turned his head toward the

qua-qua player, and they exchanged a long look before
Bell’s main praying and singing friend, Aunt Sukey, the
plantation’s laundress, stepped forward to conduct the
ceremony. After calling for all present to stand closer
together, she said, “Now, I ax everybody here to pray for dis
union dat God’bout to make. I wants y’all to pray dat dis
here couple is gwine a stay togedder—” she hesitated “—
an’ dat nothin’ don’t happen to cause ’em to git sol’ away
from one ’nother. And pray dat dey has good, healthy
young’uns.” And then very solemnly, Aunt Sukey placed a
broomstick on the close-cropped grass just in front of Kunta
and Bell, whom she now motioned to link their arms.
Kunta felt as if he were suffocating. In his mind was
flashing how marriages were conducted in his Juffure. He
could see the dancers, hear the praise singers and the
prayers, and the talking drums relaying the glad tidings to
other villages. He hoped that he would be forgiven for what
he was doing, that whatever words were spoken to their
pagan God, Allah would understand that Kunta still believed
in Him and only Him. And then, as if from afar, he heard
Aunt Sukey asking, “Now, y’all two is sho’ you wants to git
married?” Softly, alongside Kunta, Bell said, “I does.” And
Aunt Sukey turned her gaze to Kunta; he felt her eyes
boring into him. And then Bell was squeezing his arm very
hard. He forced the words from his mouth: “I does.” And
then Aunt Sukey said, “Den, in de eyes of Jesus, y’all jump
into de holy lan’ of matrimony.”
Kunta and Bell jumped high over the broomstick
together, as Bell had forced him to practice over and over
the day before. He felt ridiculous doing it, but she had
warned that a marriage would meet the very worst kind of
bad luck if the feet of either person should touch the
broomstick, and whoever did it would be the first to die. As
they landed safely together on the other side of the broom,
all the observers applauded and cheered, and when they
had quieted, Aunt Sukey spoke again: “What God done
j’ined, let no man pull asunder. Now y’all be faithful to one
’nother.” She looked at Kunta directly. “An’ be good
Christians.” Aunt Sukey turned next to look at Massa

Waller. “Massa, is it anything you cares to say for dis here
occasion?”
The massa clearly looked as if he would prefer not to, but
he stepped forward and spoke softly. “He’s got a good
woman in Bell. And she’s got a good boy. And my family
here, along with myself, wish them the rest of their lives of
good luck.” The loud cheering that followed from all of the
slave-row people was punctuated with the happy squeals of
little Missy Anne, who was jumping up and down, until her
mother pulled her away, and all the Wallers went into the
big house to let the blacks continue the celebration in their
own way.
Aunt Sukey and other friends of Bell’s had helped her
cook enough pots of food that they all but hid the top of a
long table. And amid the feasting and good cheer,
everyone there but Kunta and the Ghanaian partook of the
brandy and wines that the massa had sent up from the bighouse cellar as his gift. With the fiddler playing steadily and
loudly on his instrument ever since the party began, Kunta
didn’t know how he’d managed to sneak a drink, but from
the way he swayed as he played, it was clear that he’d
managed to get hold of more than one. He had endured the
fiddler’s drinking so often that he was resigned to it, but
when he saw Bell busy filling and refilling her wine glass, he
began to get increasingly concerned and embarrassed. He
was shocked to overhear her exclaiming to Sister Mandy,
another of her friends, “Been had my eye on him for ten
years!” And not long after that, she wobbled over, threw her
arms around him, and kissed him full on the mouth right
there in front of everyone, amid crude jokes, elbows in the
ribs, and uproarious laughter. Kunta was taut as a
bowstring by the time the rest of the guests finally began to
take their leave. Finally, they were all alone there in the
yard, and as Bell wove unsteadily toward him, she said
softly in a slurred voice, “Now you done bought de cow, you
gits all de milk you wants!” He was horrified to hear her talk
so.
But it wasn’t long before he got over it. In fact, before
many weeks had passed, he had gained considerably

more knowledge of what a big, strong, healthy woman was
really like. His hands had explored in the darkness until now
he knew for a certainty that Bell’s big behind was entirely
her own, and none of it was one of those padded bustles
that he had heard many women were wearing to make their
behinds look big. Though he hadn’t seen her naked—she
always blew out the candles before he got the chance—he
had been permitted to see her breasts, whose largeness
he noted with satisfaction were the kind that would supply
much milk for a manchild, and that was very good. But it
had been with horror that Kunta first saw the deep lash
marks on Bell’s back. “I’s carryin’ scars to my grave jes’ like
my mammy did,” Bell said, “but my back sure ain’t as bad
as your’n,” and Kunta was taken with surprise, for he hadn’t
seen his own back. He had all but forgotten all those
lashings, over twenty years ago.
With her warmth always beside him, Kunta greatly
enjoyed sleeping in Bell’s tall bed on its soft mattress; filled
as it was with cotton instead of straw or cornshucks. Her
handmade quilts, too, were comfortable and warm, and it
was a completely new and luxurious experience for him to
sleep between a pair of sheets. Almost as pleasurable for
him were the nicely fitted shirts she made for him, then
washed, starched, and ironed freshly every day. Bell even
softened the leather of his stiff, high-topped shoes by
greasing them with tallow, and she knitted him more socks
that were thickly cushioned to fit his half foot.
After years of driving the massa all day and returning at
night to a cold supper before crawling onto his solitary
pallet, now Bell saw to it that the same supper she fed the
massa—unless it was pork, of course—was simmering
over the fireplace in their cabin when he got home. And he
liked eating on her white crockery dishes with the knives,
spoons, and forks she had obviously supplied for herself
from the big house. Bell had even whitewashed her cabin—
he often had to remind himself that now it was their cabin—
on the outside as well as the inside. All in all, he was
amazed to find that he liked almost everything about her,
and he would have rebuked himself for not having come to

his senses sooner if he hadn’t been feeling too good to
spend much time thinking about all the years he’d wasted.
He just couldn’t believe how different things were, how
much better life was, than it had been just a few months
before and a few yards away.

CHAPTER 66
As close as they’d become since they “jumped de broom,”
there were times when Kunta would sense that Bell still
didn’t totally trust him. Sometimes when she was talking to
him in the kitchen or the cabin, she would nearly say
something, then abruptly veer off onto another subject, filling
Kunta with a rush of anger that only his pride enabled him to
conceal. And on more than one occasion, he had learned
things from the fiddler or the gardener that had to have
been picked up at the massa’s keyhole. It didn’t matter to
him what it was she was telling them; what hurt was that she
wasn’t telling him, that she was keeping secrets from her
own husband. What hurt him even more was that he had
always been so open in sharing with her and them—news
they might never have learned otherwise, or at least not for
a long time. Kunta began to let weeks go by without telling
even Bell about whatever he had overheard in town. When
she finally said something to him about it, he said he
guessed things had just been kind of quiet lately, and
maybe it’s just as well because the news never seemed to
be any good. But the next time he came back from town, he
figured she’d learned her lesson, and he told her that he’d
overheard the massa telling one of his friends that he’d just
read that in New Orleans a white doctor named Benjamin
Rush had written recently that when his longtime black
assistant, a slave named James Derham, had learned as
much medicine from him as he felt he knew himself, he had
set him free.
“Ain’t he de one what become a doctor hisself and got
even mo’ famous dan de man what learned him?” asked
Bell.
“How you know dat? Massa say he jes’ read ’bout it
hisself, an ain’t nobody been here fo’ you to hear him tell
about it,” said Kunta, as irritated as he was perlexed.
“Oh, I got my ways,” Bell replied mysteriously, changing
the subject.

As far as Kunta was concerned, that was the last time
she’d ever hear any news from him, and he didn’t say
another word about it—or almost anything else—for the
next week or so. Finally Bell got the hint, and after a good
dinner by candlelight there in the cabin one Sunday night,
she put her hand on his shoulder and said quietly,
“Something been hard on my mind to tell you.” Going into
their bedroom, she returned in a moment with one of the
Virginia Gazettes that Kunta knew she kept in a stack
beneath their bed. He had always assumed that she simply
enjoyed turning the pages, as he knew so many blacks did,
as well as those poor whites who walked around on
Saturdays in the county seat with newspapers opened
before their faces, though Kunta and everyone else who
saw them knew perfectly well that they couldn’t read a word.
But in some way now, as he saw the secretive look on
Bell’s face, he sensed with astonishment what she was
about to say.
“I can read some,” Bell hesitated. “Massa sell me fo’
sunup if’n he knowed dat.”
Kunta made no response, for he had learned that Bell
would do more talking on her own than if she was asked
questions. “I’s knowed some a de words ever since I was a
young’un,” she continued. “It were de chilluns of my massa
back den what teached me. Dey liked to play teacher,
’cause dey was going to school, an’ de massa and missis
didn’t pay it no ’tention on count of how de white folks tells
deyselves dat niggers is too dumb to learn anythin’.”
Kunta thought about the old black he saw regularly at the
Spotsylvania County courthouse, who had swept and
mopped there for years, with none of the whites ever
dreaming that he had copied the handwriting they left lying
around on papers until he had gotten good enough at it to
forge and sign traveling passes, which he sold to blacks.
Peering hard at the tip of her forefinger as it moved the
paper’s front page, Bell said finally, “Here where de House
of Burgesses done met again.” She studied the print
closely. “Done passed a new law ’bout taxes.” Kunta was
simply amazed. Bell moved to a place farther down the

page. “Right here it’s somethin’ ’nother’bout dat England
done sent some niggers from dere back to Africa.” Bell
glanced upward at Kunta. “You want me to pick out mo’
what dey say ’bout dat?” Kunta nodded. Bell needed
several minutes of staring at her finger, with her lips silently
forming letters and words. Then she spoke again. “Well,
ain’t sho ’bout it all, but fo’ hunnud niggers done been sent
somewheres called, look like, Sierra Leone, on land de
England bought from a king dat’s dere, an’ de niggers is
been give some land apiece ’long wid some money for a
’lowance.”
When it seemed as if the very effort of reading had
fatigued her, she went thumbing through the inside pages,
pointing out to Kunta one after another identical small
figures that were recognizable as men carrying a bundle at
the end of a stick over their shoulders, and with her finger
on the block of print under one of these figures, she said,
“Dat’s always ’scribin’ dese runaway niggers—like it was
one ’bout you de las’ time you run off. It tell what color dey
is, what marks dey got on dey faces or arms or legs or
backs from bein’ beat or branded. An’ it tell what dey was
wearin’ when dey run off, an’ sich as dat. An’ den it tell who
dey belongst to, and what reward bein’ offered to whoever
catch dem and bring dem back. I seen it be much as five
hunnud, an’ I seen it be where de nigger done run so much
dat he massa so mad he advertise ten dollars fo’ de live
nigger back an’ fi’teen fo’ jes’ his head.”
Finally she set the paper down with a sigh, seemingly
fatigued by the effort of reading. “Now you knows how I
foun’ out ’bout dat nigger doctor. Same way de massa did.”
Kunta asked if she didn’t think she might be taking
chances reading the massa’s paper like that.
“I’se real careful,” she said. “But I tell you one time I got
scared to death wid massa,” Bell added. “One day he jes’
walked in on me when I s’posed to be dustin’ in de livin’
room, but what I was doin’ was looking in one a dem books
a his’n. Lawd, I like to froze. Massa jes’ stood dere a
minute lookin’ at me. But he never said nothin’. He jes’
walked out, an’ from de next day to dis day it’s been a lock

on his bookcase.”
When Bell put away the newspaper back under the bed,
she was quiet for a while, and Kunta knew her well enough
by now to know that she still had something on her mind.
They were about ready to go to bed when she abruptly
seated herself at the table, as if she had just made up her
mind about something, and with an expression both furtive
and proud on her face, drew from her apron pocket a pencil
and a folded piece of paper. Smoothing out the paper, she
began to print some letters very carefully.
“You know what dat is?” she asked, and before Kunta
could say no, answered, “Well, dat’s my name. B-e-l-l.”
Kunta stared at the penciled characters, remembering of
how for years he had shrunk away from any closeness to
toubob writing, thinking it contained some toubob
greegrees that might bring him harm—but he still wasn’t too
sure that was so farfetched. Bell now printed some more
letters. “Dat’s your name, K-u-n-t-a.” She beamed up at
him. Despite himself, Kunta couldn’t resist bending a little
closer to study the strange markings. But then Bell got up,
crumpled the paper, and threw it onto the dying embers in
the fireplace. “Ain’t never gone git caught wid no writin’.”
Several weeks had passed before Kunta finally decided
to do something about an irritation that had been eating at
him ever since Bell showed him so proudly that she could
read and write. Like their white massas, these plantationborn blacks seemed to take it for granted that those who
had come from Africa had just climbed down from the
trees, let alone had any experience whatever with
education.
So very casually one evening after supper, he knelt down
before the cabin’s fireplace and raked a pile of ashes out
onto the hearth, then used his hands to flatten and smooth
them out. With Bell watching curiously, he then took a
slender whittled stick from his pocket and proceeded to
scratch into the ashes his name in Arabic characters.
Bell wouldn’t let him finish, demanding, “What dat?”
Kunta told her. Then, having made his point, he swept the
ashes back into the fireplace, sat down in the rocking chair,

and waited for her to ask him how he’d learned to write. He
didn’t have long to wait, and for the rest of the evening he
talked, and Bell listened for a change. In his halting speech,
Kunta told her how all the children in his village were taught
to write, with pens made of hollowed dried grass stalks,
and ink of water mixed with crushed potblack. He told her
about the arafang, and how his lessons were conducted
both mornings and evenings. Warming to his subject, and
enjoying the novelty of seeing Bell with her mouth shut for a
while, Kunta told her how the students in Juffure had to be
able to read well from the Koran before they could
graduate, and he even recited for her some Koranic
verses. He could tell she was intrigued, but it seemed
amazing to him that this was the very first time in all the
years he’d known her that she had ever shown the slightest
interest in anything about Africa.
Bell tapped the top of the table between them. “How y’all
Africans say ’table’?” she asked.
Although he hadn’t spoken in Mandinka since he left
Africa, the word “meso” popped from Kunta’s mouth almost
before he realized it, and he felt a surge of pride.
“How ’bout dat?” asked Bell, pointing at her chair.
“Sirango,” said Kunta. He was so pleased with himself that
he got up and began to walk around in the cabin, pointing
at things.
Tapping Bell’s black iron pot over the fireplace, he said
“kalero,” and then a candle on the table: “kandio.”
Astonished, Bell had risen from her chair and was following
him around. Kunta nudged a burlap bag with his shoe and
said “boto,” touched a dried gourd and said “mirango,” then
a basket that the old gardener had woven: “sinsingo.” He
led Bell on into their bedroom. “Larango,” he said, pointing
to their bed, and then a pillow: “kunglarang.” Then at the
window: “janerango,” and at the roof: “kankarango.”
“Lawd have mercy!” exclaimed Bell. That was far more
respect for his homeland than he had ever expected to
arouse in Bell.
“Now it time to put our head on de kunglarang,” said
Kunta, sitting down on the edge of the bed and starting to

undress. Bell knitted her brow, then laughed and put her
arms around him. He hadn’t felt so good in a long time.

CHAPTER 67
Though Kunta still liked to visit and swap stories with the
fiddler and the gardener, it didn’t happen nearly as often as
it used to when he was single. This was hardly surprising,
since he spent most of his free time with Bell now. But even
when they did get together lately, they seemed to feel
differently toward him than before—certainly not unfriendly,
but undeniably less companionable. It had been they who
practically pushed Kunta into Bell’s arms, yet now that he
was married, they acted a little as if they were afraid it
might be catching—or that it might never be; his obvious
contentment with hearth and home didn’t make them feel
any warmer on cold winter nights. But if he didn’t feel as
close to them as before—in the comradeship they had
shared as single men, despite their different origins—he
felt somehow more accepted now, as if by marrying Bell he
had become one of them. Though their conversations with
their married friend weren’t as earthy as they had
sometimes been before—not that Kunta would admit even
to himself that he had ever enjoyed the fiddler’s crudities—
they had become, with the building of trust and the passage
of years, even deeper and more serious.
“Scairt!” declared’ the fiddler one night. “Dat’s how come
white folks so busy countin’ everybody in dat census! Dey
scairt dey’s done brung mo’ niggers ’mongst ’em dan dey
is white folks!” declared the fiddler.
Kunta said that Bell had told him she’d read in the
Gazette that in Virginia, the census had recorded only a few
more thousand whites than blacks.
“White folks scairder of free niggers dan dey is of us’ns!”
the old gardener put in.
“I’s heared it’s near ’bout sixty thousand free niggers jes’
in Virginia,” the fiddler said. “So it ain’t no tellin’ how many
slave niggers. But even dis state ain’t where de mos’ is.
Dat’s down in dem states where de richest lan’ make the
bes’ crops, an’ dey got water for boats to take dey crops to

de markets, an’ ... ”
“Yeah, dem places it be’s two niggers for every white
folks!” the old gardener interrupted. “All down in dat
Lou’siana Delta, an’ de Yazoo Miss’ippi where dey grows
sugar cane, an’ all down in dat black belt of Alabama,
South Ca’lina, and Geo’gia where dey grows all dat rice an’
indigo, let me tell you dat down on dem great big ’way-back
plantations, dey’s got all kinds of niggers ain’t never been
counted.”
“Some o’ dem plantations so big dey’s split up into littler
ones wid oberseers in charge,” the fiddler said. “An’ de
massas dat owns dem big plantations is mostly dem big
lawyers an’ politicians an’ businessmen what lives in de
cities, an’ dey wimminfolks don’t want no parts of no
plantations ’ceptin’ maybe to bring out fancy carriages full
of dey friends maybe for Thanksgivln’ or Christmas, or
summertime picnics.”
“But you know what,” the old gardener exclaimed, “dem
rich city white folks is de very kin’ ’mongst which it’s dem
dat speaks’gainst slavery.”
The fiddler cut him off. “Humph! Dat don’ mean nothin’!
Always been some big white folks dat wants de slavery
’bolished. Shoot, slavery been outlawed here in Virginia ten
years now but law or no, you notice we still slaves, an’ dey
still bringin’ in more shiploads of niggers.”
“Where dey all bein’ taken?” asked Kunta. “Some buggy
drivers I knows say dey massas go on long trips where dey
don’ hardly see another black face for days at a time.” “It’s
a plenty whole counties dat ain’t even got one big plantation
on ’em, an’ hardly no niggers atall,” said the gardener. “Jes’
nothin’ but dem little rocky farms dat’s sol’ for fifty cents a
acre to dem white folks so po’ dey eats dirt. An’ not a whole
lot better off dan dem is de ones dat got not much better
land an’ jes’ a handful of slaves.”
“One place I heared ’bout ain’t got no handful o’ niggers,
it’s dem West Indies, whatever dem is,” said the fiddler,
turning to Kunta. “You know where? It’s ’crost de water like
you come from.” Kunta shook his head.
“Anyway,” the fiddler went on, “I hears it’s many as a

thousan’ niggers b’longin’ to one massa dere, raisin’ and
cuttin’ dat cane dat dey makes sugar an ’lasses an’ rum out
of. Dey tells me a whole lots of dem ships like brung you
over here stops off African niggers in dem West Indies to
keep ’em awhile jes’ to fatten ’em up from dem long trips
dat gits ’em so sick an’ starved dey’s near ’bout dead.
Fattens ’em up, den brings ’em on here to git de better
prices for niggers dat’s fit to work. Leas’ways, dat’s what
I’se heared.”
It had never failed to amaze Kunta how the fiddler and the
gardener seemed to know so much about things they’d
never seen and places they’d never been to, for he
distinctly recalled having heard both of them say they had
never been outside of Virginia and North Carolina. He had
traveled far more widely than they had—not only all the way
from Africa but also back and forth across the state in the
massa’s buggy—but they still knew so much more than he
did that even after all these years of talking to them, he was
finding out things he hadn’t known before.
It didn’t really bother Kunta to find out how ignorant he
was, since they were helping him become less so; but it
troubled him deeply to learn over the years that even he
was better informed than the average slave. From what
he’d been able to observe, most blacks literally didn’t even
know where they were, let alone who they were.
“I bet you half de niggers in Virginia ain’t never been off
dey massa’s plantations,” said Bell when he raised the
subject with her. “An’ ain’t never heard of nowhere else
’ceptin’ maybe Richmond an’ Fredericksburg an’ up Nawth,
an’ don’ have no idea where none of dem is. De white folks
keeps niggers ign’ant o’ where dey is ’cause dey so
worried ’bout niggers uprisin’ or ’scapin’.”
Before Kunta had the chance to recover from his surprise
at hearing an insight like this one coming from Bell rather
than the fiddler or the gardener, she spoke again. “You
reckon you still would run again if’n you had de chance?”
Kunta was stunned by the question, and for a long time
he didn’t answer. Then finally he said, “Well, long time I ain’t
done no thinkin’ ’bout dat.”

“Whole lots of times I be’s thinkin’ a heap o’ things
nobody wouldn’t figger I does,” said Bell. “Like sometime I
gits to thinkin’’bout bein’ free, like I hears ’bout dem dat gits
away up to de Nawth.” She looked dosely at Kunta. “Don’
care how good de massa is, I gits to feelin’ like if you an’
me was younger’n we is, I believes I’d be ready to leave
’way from here tonight.” As Kunta sat there astonished, she
said quietly, “Reckon I’se got to be too old and scairt now.”
Bell could have been reading the thought he was having
at that moment about himself, and it hit him like a fist. He
was too old to run away again and too beat up. And scared.
All the pain and terror of those terrible days and nights of
running came back: the blistered feet, the bursting lungs,
the bleeding hands, the tearing thorns, the baying of the
hounds, the snarling jaws, the gunshots, the sting of the
lash, the falling ax. Without even realizing it, Kunta had
plunged into a black depression. Knowing that she had
aroused it without meaning to, but knowing also that she’d
only make it worse by talking about it any further, even to
apologize, Bell simply got up and went to bed.
When he finally realized that she was gone, Kunta felt
badly that he had cut her out of his thoughts. And it pained
him to think how grievously he had underestimated her and
the other blacks.
Though they never showed it except to those they loved,
and sometimes not even then, he realized at last that they
felt—and hated—no less than he the oppressiveness under
which they all lived. He wished he could find a way to tell her
how sorry he was, how he felt her pain, how grateful he was
to feel her love, how strong he felt the bond between them
growing deep within himself. Quietly he got up, went into the
bedroom, took off his clothes, got into bed, took her in his
arms, and made love to her—and she to him—with a kind
of desperate intensity.

CHAPTER 68
For several weeks, it seemed to Kunta that Bell had been
acting very oddly. For one thing, she was hardly talking, but
she wasn’t even in a bad mood. And she was casting what
he felt were peculiar looks at him, then sighing loudly when
he stared back. And she had begun smiling mysteriously to
herself while rocking in her chair, sometimes even
humming tunes. Then one night, just after they’d blown out
the candle and climbed into bed, she grasped Kunta’s
hand and placed it tenderly on her stomach. Something
inside her moved beneath his hand. Kunta sprang up fit to
split with joy.
Over the next days, he hardly noticed where he was
driving. For all he knew, the massa could have been pulling
the buggy and the horses sitting on the seat behind him, so
filled was his mind’s eye with visions of Bell paddling down
the bolong to the rice fields with his man-child bundled
snugly on her back. He thought of little else but the myriad
significances of this coming firstborn, even as for Binta and
Omoro he had been the firstborn. He vowed that just as
they and others had done for him in Juffure, he was going to
teach this man-child to be a true man, no matter what trials
and hazards that might involve here in the land of the
toubob. For it was the job of a father to be as a giant tree to
his man-child. For where girlchildren simply ate food until
they grew big enough to marry and go away—and
girlchildren were their mothers’ concerns, in any case—it
was the man-child who carried on his family’s name and
reputation, and when the time came that his parents were
old and tottering, it would be the well-reared man-child who
put nothing before taking care of them.
Bell’s pregnancy took Kunta’s mind even farther back to
Africa than his encounter with the Ghanaian had done. One
night, in fact, he completely forgot Bell was in the cabin
while he patiently counted out all the pebbles in his gourd,
discovering with astonishment that he hadn’t seen his

homeland now for exactly 22½ rains. But most evenings
she would be talking almost steadily while he sat there
hearing less than usual and gazing off at nothing. “He jes’
go off into his Africanisms,” Bell would tell Aunt Sukey, and
after a while Bell would rise unnoticed from her chair,
quietly leave the room—muttering to herself—and go to
sleep alone.
It had been one such night when, about an hour after
she’d gone to bed, Kunta was snapped back to the cabin
by moans from the bedroom. Was it time? Rushing in, he
found her still asleep, but rolling back and forth on the verge
of screaming. When he leaned over to touch her cheek, she
sat bolt upright there in the darkness, soaked with sweat
and breathing hard.
“Lawd, I’m scairt to death for dis baby in my belly!” she
said as she put her arms around him. Kunta didn’t
understand until she composed herself enough to tell how
she had dreamed that at a white folks’ party game, they
had announced that the first prize would be the next black
baby to be born on that massa’s plantation. Bell was so
distraught that Kunta found himself in the unaccustomed
role of calming her with assurances that she knew Massa
Waller never would do such a thing. He made her agree
with that, then climbed into bed alongside her, and finally
she went back to sleep.
But Kunta didn’t; he lay thinking for quite sometime of
how he had heard of such things being done—of unborn
black babies being given as presents, wagered as
gambling bets at card tables and cockfights. The fiddler
had told him how the dying massa of a pregnant fifteenyear-old black girl named Mary had willed as slaves to
each of his five daughters one apiece of her first five
babies. He had heard of black children being security for
loans, of creditors claiming them while they were yet in their
mother’s belly, of debtors selling them in advance to raise
cash. At that time in the Spotsylvania County seat slave
auctions, he knew the average price that was being asked
and paid for a healthy black baby past six months of age—
when it was assumed then that it would live—was around

two hundred dollars.
None of this was very far from his mind when Bell
laughingly told him one evening in the cabin about three
months later that during the day the inquisitive Missy Anne
had demanded to know why Bell’s belly was growing so
big. “I tol’ Missy Anne, ‘I got a l’il biscuit in de oven, honey.’”
Kunta was hardly able to keep Bell from seeing his anger at
the attention and affection she lavished on that pampered,
doll-like child, who was to him but another in the seemingly
endless parade of “l’il missies” and “l’il massas” he had
seen at so many big houses. Now with Bell about to have a
child of her own—and his own—it incensed him to think
about the firstborn son of Kunta and Bell Kinte romping in
“play” with toubob children who would grow up to become
their massas—and sometimes even the fathers of their own
children. And Kunta had been to more than a few
plantations where one of the slave children was almost the
same color as his massas’—in fact, they often looked like
twins—because both of them had the same white father.
Before Kunta let anything like that happen to Bell, he vowed
that he would kill the massa rather than become one of
those men he had seen holding their wife’s “high-yaller”
baby and living somehow with the knowledge that if he
uttered publicly so much as a complaining word, he would
certainly get beaten, if not worse.
Kunta thought about how “high-yaller” slave girls brought
high prices at the county seat slave auctions. He had seen
them being sold, and he had heard many times about the
purposes for which they were bought. And he thought of the
many stories he had heard about “high-yaller” man-children
—about how they were likely to get mysteriously taken
away as babies never to be seen again, because of the
white fear that otherwise they might grow up into whitelooking men and escape to where they weren’t known and
mix the blackness in their blood with that of white women.
Every time Kunta thought about any aspect of blood mixing,
he would thank Allah that he and Bell could share the
comfort of knowing that whatever otherwise might prove to
be His will, their man-child was going to be black.

It was early one night in September of 1790 when the
labor pains began to take hold of Bell. But she wouldn’t yet
let Kunta go for the massa, who had said that he would
personally attend her, with Sister Mandy to be in readiness
as his assistant if he should need her. Each time the pains
came, Bell lay on the bed gritting her teeth to keep from
crying out, and she would tighten her grip on Kunta’s hand
with the strength of a man.
It was during one of the brief intervals between the pains
that Bell turned her sweating face to Kunta and said, “It’s
something I oughta tol’ you ’fore now. I’s already done had
two chilluns, long time ago, ’fore I ever come here, ’fore I
was sixteen years ol’.” Kunta stood looking down at the
anguished Bell, astounded. Had he known this—no, he
would have married her anyway—but he felt betrayed that
she hadn’t told him before. Making herself gasp out the
words between contractions, Bell told him about the two
daughters from whom she had been sold away. “Jes’
nothin’ but babies is all dey was.” She began to weep. “One
was jes’ startin’ to walk good, an’ de other’n weren’t a year
old hardly—.” She started to go on, but a spasm of pain
clamped her mouth shut and tightened her grip on his hand.
When it finally subsided, her grip didn’t loosen; she looked
up at him through her tears and—reading his racing
thoughts—said, “Case you wond’rin’, dere daddy weren’t
no massa or no oberseer. Was a field nigger ’bout my age.
We didn’t know no better.”
The pains came again, much sooner than before, and
her nails dug into his palm as her mouth opened wide in a
soundless scream. Kunta rushed from the cabin down to
Sister Mandy’s hut, where he banged the door and called to
her hoarsely, then ran on as fast as he could go to the big
house. His knocking and calling finally brought Massa
Waller, who needed but one glance at Kunta to say, “I’ll be
right there!”
Hearing Bell’s anguished moans rise into shrieks that
went ripping through the quiet of slave row pushed from
Kunta’s mind any thought of what Bell had revealed to him.
As much as he wanted to be by Bell’s side, he was glad

Sister Mandy had ordered him outside, where he squatted
at the door trying to imagine what must be going on inside.
He had never learned much about childbirth in Africa, since
that was considered women’s affair, but he had heard that
a woman birthed a child while kneeling over cloths spread
on the floor, then sat in a pan of water to clean away the
blood, and he wondered if that’s what was happening now.
It occurred to Kunta that far away in Juffure, Binta and
Omoro were becoming grandparents, and it saddened him
to know not only that they would never see his man-child—
or he them—but also that they would never know he’d had
one.
Hearing the first sharp cries of another voice, Kunta
sprang upright. A few minutes later, the massa emerged
looking haggard. “She had a hard time. She’s forty-three
years old,” he said to Kunta. “But she’ll be fine in a couple
of days.” The massa gestured toward the cabin door. “Give
Mandy a little while to clean up; then you go on in there and
see your baby girl.”
A girlchild! Kunta was still struggling to compose himself
when Sister Mandy appeared at the doorway, smiling and
beckoning him inside. Cripping through the front room, he
pushed aside the curtain at the bedroom door and there
they were. As he moved quietly to her side, a floorboard
squeaked and Bell opened her eyes, managing a weak
smile. Absently, he found her hand and squeezed, but he
scarcely felt it, for he couldn’t stop staring at the face of the
infant who lay beside her. It was almost as black as his, and
the features were unmistakably Mandinka. Though it was a
girlchild—which must be the will of Allah—it was
nonetheless a child, and he felt a deep pride and serenity in
the knowledge that the blood of the Kintes, which had
coursed down through the centuries like a mighty river,
would continue to flow for still another generation.
Kunta’s next thoughts, standing there at the bedside,
were of a fitting name for his child. Though he knew enough
not to ask the massa for eight days off from work to spend
deciding on it, as a new father would in Africa, he knew that
the matter would require long and serious reflection, for he

knew that what a child was called would really influence the
kind of person he or she became. Then it flashed into his
mind that whatever name he gave her, she would be also
called by the last name of the massa; the thought was so
infuriating that Kunta vowed before Allah that this girlchild
would grow up knowing her own true name.
Abruptly, without a word, he turned and left. With the sky
just beginning to show the traces of early dawn, he went
outside and started walking down along the fence row
where he and Bell had shared their courtship. He had to
think. Remembering what she had told him about her life’s
greatest grief—having been sold away from her two infant
girlchildren—he searched his mind for a name, some
Mandinka word, that would have as its meaning Bell’s
deepest wish never to suffer such a loss again, a name that
would protect its owner from ever losing her. Suddenly he
had it! Turning the word over and over in his mind, he
resisted the temptation to speak it aloud, even just for
himself, for that would have been improper. Yes, that had to
be it! Exhilarated with his good luck in such a short while,
Kunta hurried back along the fencerow to the cabin.
But when he told Bell that he was prepared for his child to
be named, she protested far more strongly than he would
have thought her capable of in her condition. “What’s sich a
rush to name ’er? Name ’er what? We ain’t talked ’bout no
name nohow!” Kunta knew well how stubborn Bell could be
once she got her back up, so there was anguish as well as
anger in his voice as he searched for the right words to
explain that there were certain traditions that must be
honored, certain precedures that must be followed in the
naming of a child; chief among them was the selection of
that name by the father alone, who was permitted to tell no
one what it was until he had revealed it to the child, and that
this was only right. He went on to say that haste was
essential lest their child hear first some name that the
massa might decide upon for her.
“Now I sees!” said Bell. “Dese Africanisms you so full of
ain’t gon’ do nothin’ but make trouble. An’ dey ain’t gon’ be
none of dem heathen ways, an’ names, neither, for dis

chile!”
In a fury, Kunta stormed out of the cabin—and nearly
bumped into Aunt Sukey and Sister Mandy on their way in
with armloads of towels and steaming pots of water.
“’Gratulations, Br’er Toby, we comin’ to look in on Bell.”
But Kunta scarcely grunted at them as he passed. A field
hand named Cato was headed out to ring the first bell of
the morning, signaling the others out of their cabins for
buckets of water from the well to wash up with before
breakfast. Kunta quickly turned off slave row to take the
back path that led to the barn, wanting as much distance as
he could get between him and those heathen blacks whom
the toubob had trained to shrink away in fear from anything
smacking of the Africa that had been their very sourceplace.
In the sanctuary of the barn, Kunta angrily fed, watered,
and then rubbed down the horses. When he knew that it
was time for the massa to have his breakfast, he took the
long way around again on his way to the big-house kitchen
door, where he asked Aunt Sukey, who was filling in for
Bell, if the massa was going to need the buggy. Refusing to
speak or even turn around, she shook her head and left the
room without even offering him any food. Limping back to
the barn, Kunta wondered what Bell had told Aunt Sukey
and Sister Mandy for them to go gossiping through slave
row; then he told himself that he couldn’t care less.
He had to do something with himself; he couldn’t just idle
away more hours around the barn. Moving outside with the
buggy harnesses, he set about his familiar task of killing
time by oiling them unnecessarily, as he had just done only
two weeks before. He wanted to go back to the cabin to
see the baby—and even Bell—but anger rose every time
he thought of what a disgrace it was that the wife of a Kinte
could want her child to bear some toubob name, which
would be nothing but the first step toward a lifetime of selfcontempt.
About noontime, Kunta saw Aunt Sukey taking in to Bell
a pot of some food—some kind of soup, probably. It made
him hungry to think about it; a few minutes later he went out

behind the barn where some recently harvested sweet
potatoes had been mounded under straw for curing, picked
out four of the smaller ones, and—feeling very sorry for
himself—ate them raw to appease his stomach.
Dusk was descending before he could bring himself to
go home. When he opened the front door and walked in,
there was no sound of response from Bell in the bedroom.
She could be asleep, he thought, leaning over to light a
candle on the table.
“Dat you?”
He could detect no special harshness in Bell’s tone.
Grunting noncommittally, he picked up the candle, pushed
aside the curtain, and went into the bedroom. In the ruddy
glow, he could see that the expression on her face was as
adamant as his own.
“Looka here, Kunta,” she said, wasting no time getting to
the point, “it’s some things I knows ’bout our massa better’n
you does. You git him mad wid dat African stuff, he sell us
all three at de next county seat auction jes’ sho’s we born!”
Containing the anger within him as well as he could,
Kunta stumbled for the words that could make Bell
understand the absoluteness of his determination that
whatever the risks, his child would bear no toubob name,
and that moreover she would be given her name in the
proper manner.
As deeply as Bell disapproved, she was even more
apprehensive of what Kunta might do if she refused. So
with deep misgivings, she finally acquiesced. “What kin’ o’
voodoo you got to do?” she asked dubiously. When he said
he was simply going to take the baby outdoors for a while,
she insisted that he wait until the child awakened and she
had nursed her so that she wouldn’t be hungry and crying,
and Kunta immediately agreed. Bell reckoned that the baby
wouldn’t wake up for at least another two hours, by which
time it would be most unlikely that anyone in slave row
would still be up to see whatever mumbo jumbo Kunta was
going to perform. Though she didn’t show it, Bell was still
angry that Kunta prevented her from helping him pick a
name for the daughter she had just brought into the world

amid such agony; and she dreaded finding out what
African-sounding, forbidden name Kunta had come up with,
but she was sure that she could deal with the baby’s name
later in her own way.
It was near midnight when Kunta emerged from the
cabin, carrying his firstborn wrapped snugly in a blanket. He
walked until he felt they were far enough from slave row that
it couldn’t cast a pall over what was about to take place.
Then, under the moon and the stars, Kunta raised the
baby upward, turning the blanketed bundle in his hands so
that the baby’s right ear touched against his lips. And then
slowly and distinctly, in Mandinka, he whispered three times
into the tiny ear, “Your name is Kizzy. Your name is Kizzy.
Your name is Kizzy.” It was done, as it had been done with
all of the Kinte ancestors, as it had been done with himself,
as it would have been done with this infant had she been
born in her ancestral homeland. She had become the first
person to know who she was.
Kunta felt Africa pumping in his veins—and flowing from
him into the child, the flesh of him and Bell—as he walked
on a little farther. Then again he stopped, and lifting a small
corner of the blanket he bared the infant’s small black face
to the heavens, and this time he spoke aloud to her in
Mandinka. “Behold, the only thing greater than yourself!”
When Kunta returned with the baby to the cabin, Bell all
but snatched her away, her face tight with fear and
resentment as she opened the blanket and examined her
from head to toe, not knowing what she was looking for and
hoping she wouldn’t find it. Satisfied that he hadn’t done
anything unspeakable—at least nothing that showed—she
put the baby to bed, came back into the front room, sat
down in the chair across from him, folded her hands
carefully in her lap, and asked,
“Awright, lemme have it.”
“Have what?”
“De name, African, what you call her?”
“Kizzy.”
“Kizzy! Ain’t nobody never heared no name like dat!”
Kunta explained that in Mandinka “Kizzy” meant “you sit

down,” or “you stay put,” which, in turn, meant that unlike
Bell’s previous two babies, this child would never get sold
away.
She refused to be placated. “Jes’ start troubles!” she
insisted. But when she felt Kunta’s anger starting to rise
again she thought it would be wise to relent. She said she
seemed to recall her mother speaking of a grandmother
whose name was “Kibby,” which sounded very much the
same; at least that’s what they could tell the massa if he got
suspicious.
The next morning, Bell did her best to hide her
nervousness when the massa came to look in on her—even
forcing herself to laugh good-naturedly as she told him the
baby’s name. He only commented that it was an odd name,
but he said nothing against it, and Bell breathed a heavy
sigh of relief the moment he stepped out the door. Back in
the big house, before leaving for a day of visiting his
patients with Kunta driving him, Massa Waller opened the
large black Bible that he kept locked in a case in the
drawing room, turned to a page devoted to plantation
records, dipped his pen in the inkwell, and wrote in fine
black script: “Kizzy Waller, born September 12, 1790.”

CHAPTER 69
“She jes’ like a l’il nigger doll!” squealed Missy Anne,
hopping ecstatically up and down, clapping her hands with
delight, as she saw Kizzy for the first time three days later in
Bell’s kitchen. “Cain’t she be mine?”
Bell smiled widely with pleasure. “Well, she belongst to
me an’ her daddy, honey, but jes’ soon’s she big enough,
you sho’ can play wid her all you wants!”
And so she did. As often as not, whenever Kunta went to
the kitchen now to find out if the buggy would be needed, or
simply to visit Bell, he would find the massa’s flaxen-haired
little niece—four years old now—bent over the edge of
Kizzy’s basket cooing down at her. “Jes’ pretty as you can
be. We gonna have plenty fun soon’s you get some size,
you hear me? You jes’ hurry up an’ grow, now!” Kunta never
said anything about it, but it galled him to think how that
toubob child acted as if Kizzy had entered the world to
serve as her plaything, like some extraordinary doll. Bell
hadn’t even respected his manhood and fatherhood
enough to ask his feelings about his daughter playing with
the daughter of the man who bought him, he thought bitterly.
It seemed to him sometimes that Bell was less
concerned about his feelings than she was about the
massa’s. He’d lost count of the evenings she’d spent
talking about what a blessing it was that little Missy Anne
had come along to replace Massa Waller’s real daughter,
who had died at birth along with her mother.
“Oh, Lawd, I jes’ even hates to think back on it,” she told
him sniffing one night. “Po’ l’il pretty Missis Priscilla weren’t
hardly no bigger’n a bird. Walkin’ roun’ here every day
singin’ to herself an’ smilin’ at me an’ pattin’ herself, jes’
waitin’ for her baby’s time. An’ den dat mornin’ jes’ ascreamin’ and finally dyin’, her an’ de l’il baby gal, too! Look
like I ain’t hardly seen po’ massa do no smilin’ since—
leastways not ’til dis here l’il Missy Anne.”
Kunta felt no pity for the massa’s loneliness, but it

seemed to him that getting married again would keep the
massa too busy to spend so much time doting on his niece,
and that way would almost certainly cut down on Missy
Anne’s visits to the plantation—and therefore to play with
Kizzy.
“Ever since then I been watchin’ how massa git dat l’il gal
in his lap, hol’ her close, talk to her, sing her to sleep, an’
den jes’ set on dere holdin’ her ruther’n put her to bed. Jes’
act like he don’t never want his eyes to leave her all de time
she be roun’ here. An’ I know it’s ’cause he’s her daddy in
his heart.”
It could only dispose the massa even more kindly toward
both of them, not to mention toward Kizzy, Bell would tell
him, for Missy Anne to strike up a friendship that would
bring her over to the massa’s house even more often than
before. Nor could it hurt Massa John and his sickly wife,
she reasoned slyly, that their daughter was developing a
special closeness to her uncle, “’cause den de closer dey
figgers dey is to massa’s money.” However important the
massa’s brother acted, she said she knew for a fact that he
borrowed from the massa now and then, and Kunta knew
enough not to disbelieve her—not that he really cared which
toubob was richer than which, since they were all alike to
him.
Oftentimes now, since Kizzy’s arrival, as Kunta drove the
massa around to see his patients and his friends, he would
find himself sharing the wish Bell had often expressed that
the massa would marry again—although Kunta’s reasons
were entirely different from Bell’s. “He jes’ be’s so pitiful to
me livin’ all by hisself in dis big house. Fact, I believes dat’s
how come he keep y’all always out dere in de buggy on
dem roads, he jes’ want to keep hisself movin’, ruther’n
settin’ roun’ here by hisself Lawd, even l’il ol’ Missy Anne
sees it! Las’ time she was here, I was servin’ dem lunch an’
all of a sudden she say, ‘Uncle William, how come you ain’t
got no wife like everybody else?’ An’ po’ thing, he didn’t
know what to say to her.”
Though he had never told Bell about it because he knew
how much she loved prying into toubob affairs, Kunta knew

of several women who would run almost on their tiptoes out
to meet the massa’s buggy whenever Kunta turned into
their driveway. The fat black cook of one of massa’s more
incurable patients had told Kunta scornfully, “Dat hateful
huzzy ain’t got nothin’ wrong dat catchin’ yo’ massa
wouldn’t cure mighty fast. She done already drive one man
to de grave wid her ornery, evil ways, an’ now she jes’
claimin’ sickness to keep yo’ massa comin’ back here. I
sho’ wish he could see her soon’s y’all leave, a-hollerin’ an’
carryin’ on at us niggers like we was mules or somethin’,
an’ she don’t never touch dem medicines he give ’er!”
There was another woman patient who would always come
onto her front porch with the massa as he left, clinging to
one of his arms as if she might fall, and looking up into his
face while fluttering her fan weakly. But with both of these
women, the massa always acted very stiff and formal, and
his visits always seemed to be shorter than with his other
patients.
So the months kept on rolling past, with Missy Anne
being brought to visit Massa Waller about twice a week,
and each time she came she’d spend hours playing with
Kizzy. Though he was helpless to do anything about it,
Kunta tried at least to avoid seeing them together, but they
seemed to be everywhere he turned, and he couldn’t
escape the sight of his little girl being patted, kissed, or
fondled by the massa’s niece. It filled him with revulsion—
and reminded him of an African saying so old that it had
come down from the forefathers: “In the end, the cat always
eats the mouse it’s played with.”
The only thing that made it bearable for Kunta was the
days and nights in between her visits. It was summer by the
time Kizzy began to crawl, and Bell and Kunta would spend
the evenings in their cabin watching with delight as she
scuttled about the floor with her little diapered behind
upraised. But then Missy Anne would show up again and off
they’d go, with the older girl frisking in circles around her
shouting, “C’mon, Kizzy, c’mon!” and Kizzy crawling in
pursuit as quickly as she could, gurgling with pleasure at
the game and the attention. Bell would beam with pleasure,

but she’d know that even if Kunta was away driving the
massa, he only needed to find out that Missy Anne had
been there to return to the cabin that night with his face set
and his lips compressed, and for the rest of the night he
would be totally withdrawn, which Bell found extremely
irritating. But when she considered what might happen if
Kunta should ever exhibit his feelings even vaguely in any
manner that might reach the massa, she was also a little
frightened when he acted that way.
So Bell tried to convince Kunta that no harm could come
of the relationship if only he could bring himself to accept it.
Oftentimes, she told him, white girls grew up into lifetimes
of true devotion and even deep loyalties to black childhood
playmates. “’Fo’ you commence to drivin’ de buggy,” she
said, “dey was a white missis died havin’ a chile—jes’ like
his own missis did—only dis time de baby girl lived an’ got
suckled by a nigger woman what jes’ had a baby girl o’ her
own. Dem l’il gals had growed up near ’bout like sisters
when dat massa married again. But dat new missis was so
strong ’gainst dem gals bein’ close, she finally ’suaded dat
massa to sell away de black gal an’ her mammy both.” But
the moment they were gone, she went on, the white girl
went into such continuing hysterics that time and again
Massa Waller was sent for, until finally he told the father that
further weakness and grief would kill his daughter unless
the black girl was returned. “Dat massa was’bout ready to
whip dat new wife of his’n. He lef’ on his ridin’ hoss an’ ain’t
no tellin’ how much he must o’ spent trackin’ down de
nigger trader dat took de gal an’ her mammy away, an’ den
buyin’ dem back from de new massa de nigger trader had
sol’ dem to. But he brung back dat black gal an’ got a
lawyer an’ deeded her over to be de property o’ his own
gal.” And Bell said that even now, years later, though that
white girl had grown to womanhood, she had never entirely
regained her health. “De black one still livin’ right wid her
an’ takin’ care of her, an’ neither one ain’t never even
married!”
As far as Kunta was concerned, if Bell had intended her
story as an argument against friendship between black and

whites rather than in favor of it, she could hardly have made
a more eloquent case.

CHAPTER 70
From about the time Kizzy had been born, both Kunta and
the fiddler had returned to the plantation now and then with
news about some island across the big water called “Haiti,”
where it was said that around thirty-six thousand mostly
French whites were outnumbered by about half a million
blacks who had been brought there on ships from Africa to
slave on huge plantations growing sugar cane, coffee,
indigo, and cocoa. One night Bell said she had heard
Massa Waller telling his dinner guests that reportedly
Haiti’s rich class of whites lived like kings while snubbing
the many poorer whites who couldn’t afford slaves of their
own.
“’Magin’ dat! Who ever heared o’ such a thing?” said the
fiddler sarcastically.
“Hush!” said Bell, laughing, and went on to say that the
massa then told his horrified guests that for several
generations in Haiti, so much breeding had gone on
between white men and slave women that there were now
almost twenty-eight thousand mulattoes and high-yallers,
commonly called “colored people,” of whom nearly all had
been given freedom by their French owners and fathers.
According to one of the other guests, said Bell, these
“colored people” invariably sought yet lighter-complexioned
mates, with their goal being children of entirely white
appearance, and those who remained visibly mulatto would
bribe officials for documents declaring that their forefathers
had been Indians or Spanish or anything but Africans. As
astonishing as he found it to believe, and as deeply as he
deplored it, Massa Waller had said that through the gift
deeds or the last wills of many whites, quite a sizable
number of these “coloreds” had come to own at least one
fifth of all the Haitian land—and its slaves—that they
vacationed in France and schooled their children there just
as the rich whites did, and even snubbed poor whites.
Bell’s audience was as delighted to hear that as the

massa’s had been scandalized.
“You gon’ laugh out o’ de other sides you’ moufs,” the
fiddler interrupted, “when you hears what I heared some o’
dem rich massas talkin’ ’bout at one o’ dem so-ciety cotillyums I played at a while back.” The massas, he said,
were nodding their heads as they discussed how those
poor whites down in Haiti hated those mulattoes and highyallers so much that they’d signed petitions until France
finally passed laws prohibiting “coloreds” from walking
about at night, from sitting alongside whites in churches, or
even from wearing the same kind of fabrics in their clothes.
In the meantime, said the fiddler, both whites and
“coloreds” would take out their bitterness toward each other
on Haiti’s half-million black slaves. Kunta said he had
overheard talk in town among laughing whites that made it
sound as if Haitian slaves were suffering worse than here.
He said he’d heard that blacks getting beaten to death or
buried alive as punishment was commonplace, and that
pregnant black women were often driven at work until they
miscarried. Since he felt it wouldn’t have served any
purpose other than to terrify them, he didn’t tell them that he
had heard about even more inhuman bestialities, such as a
black man’s hands being nailed to a wall until he was
forced to eat his own cut-off ears; a toubob woman having
all her slaves’ tongues cut out; another gagging a black
child’s mouth until he starved.
In the wake of such horror stories over the past nine or
ten months, it didn’t surprise Kunta, on one of his trips to
town during this summer of 1791, to learn that Haiti’s black
slaves had risen in a wild, bloody revolt. Thousands of them
had swept forth slaughtering, clubbing, and beheading
white men, gutting children, raping women, and burning
every plantation building until northern Haiti lay in smoking
ruins and the terrorized escaped white population was
fighting to stay alive and lashing back—torturing, killing,
even skinning every black they could catch. But they had
been only a handful of survivors steadily dwindling before
the wildly spreading black revolt, until by the end of August
the few remaining thousands of whites still alive were in

hiding places or trying to flee the island.
Kunta said he had never seen Spotsylvania County’s
toubob so angry and afraid. “Seem like dey’s even scairder
dan de las’ uprisin’ right here in Virginia,” said the fiddler.
“Was maybe two, three years after you come, but you still
weren’t hardly talkin’ to nobody, so don’ reckon you even
knowed it. Was right over yonder in New Wales, in Hanover
County, during one Christmastime. A oberseer beat some
young nigger to de groun’, an’ dat nigger sprung up an’
went at him wid a ax. But he missed ’im, an’ de other
niggers jumped de oberseer an’ beat ’im so bad dat de
first nigger come an’ saved his life. Dat oberseer went
runnin’ for help, all bloody, an’ meanwhile dem mad niggers
caught two more white mens an’ tied ’em up and was
beatin’ on ’em when a great big bunch a’ whites come arunnin’ wid guns. Dem niggers took cover in a barn, an’ de
white folks tried to sweet-talk’em to come on out, but dem
niggers come a-rushin’ wid barrel staves an’ clubs, an’ it
woun’ up wid two niggers shot dead an’ a lot of both white
mens an’ niggers hurt. Dey put out militia patrols, an’ some
mo’ laws was passed, an’ sich as dat, till it simmered
down. Dis here Haiti thing done freshened white folks’
minds, ’cause dey knows jes’ good as me it’s a whole heap
o’ niggers right under dey noses wouldn’t need nothin’ but
de right spark to rise up right now, an’ once dat ever get to
spreadin’, yessuh, it be de same as Haiti right here in
Virginia.” The fiddler clearly relished the thought.
Kunta was soon to see the whites’ fright for himself
wherever he drove in the towns, or near the crossroads
stores, taverns, church meetinghouses, or wherever else
they gathered in small, agitated clusters, their faces red
and scowling whenever he or any other black passed
nearby. Even the massa, who rarely spoke to Kunta other
than to tell him where he wanted to be driven, made even
those words noticeably colder and more clipped. Within a
week, the Spotsylvania County militia was patrolling the
roads, demanding to know the destination and to inspect
the traveling permit of any passing blacks, and beating and
jailing any they thought acted or even looked suspicious. At

a meeting of the area’s massas, the soon approaching big
annual harvest frolic for slaves was canceled, along with all
other black gatherings beyond home plantations; and even
any home slave-row dancing or prayer meetings were to be
watched by an overseer or some other white. “When massa
tol’ me dat, I tol’ him me an’ Aunt Sukey an’ Sister Mandy
gits on our knees an’ prays to Jesus togedder every
Sunday an’ any other chance we gits, but he ain’t say
nothin’ ’bout watchin’ us, so we gon’ keep right on prayin’!”
Bell told the others on slave row.
Alone at home with Kunta and Kizzy for the next several
nights in search of the latest news, Bell spelled her way
through several newspapers the massa thought he had
discarded. It took her the better part of an hour on one big
story before she could tell him that “some kin’ o’ Bill o’
Rights done got . . .” Bell hesitated and drew a deep
breath, “well, it done got rat-ti-fied, or somethin’ ’nother.”
But there were far more reports about recent events in Haiti
—most of which they’d already heard through the slave
grapevine. The gist of most of them, she said, was that the
Haitian slave revolt could easily spread foolhardy notions
among black malcontents in this country, that extreme
restrictions and harsh punishments should be imposed. As
she folded up the papers and put them away, Bell said,
“Look like to me ain’t much more dey can do ’gainst us,
less’n it’s jes’ chain us all up, I reckon.”
Over the next month or two, however, news of further
developments in Haiti slowly ebbed, and with it came a
gradual easing of tensions—and a lightening of restrictions
—throughout the South. The harvest season had begun,
and whites were congratulating one another on the bumper
cotton crop—and the record prices they were getting for it.
The fiddler was being sent for to play at so many big-house
balls and parties that during the daytime when he was back
home, he did little more than sleep. “Look like dem massas
makin’ so much cotton money dey jes’ gwine dance
deyselves to death!” he told Kunta.
It wasn’t long, however until the white folks had something
to be unhappy about again. On his visits to the county seat

with the massa, Kunta began to hear angry talk of
increasing numbers of “antislavery societies” organized by
“traitors to the white race” not only in the North but also in
the South. Highly dubious, he told Bell what he had heard,
and she said she’d been reading the same thing in the
massa’s newspapers, which attributed their recent and
rapid growth to Haiti’s black revolt.
“Keeps tryin’ tell you it’s some good white folks!” she
exclaimed. “Fact of de matter, I’se heared a whole heap of
’em was ’gainst de firs’ ships ever bringin’ any y’all African
niggers here!” Kunta wondered where on earth Bell thought
her own grandparents had come from, but she was so
wound up that he let it pass. “’Cose, anytime somethin’ like
dat be’s in de paper,” she went on, “de massas gits riled
up, rantin’ an’ hollerin’ ’bout enemies of de country an’ sich
as dat, but what’s ’portant is de mo’ white folks ’gainst
slavery says what dey thinks, den de mo’ of dem massas
git to wonderin’ in dey secret heart is dey right or not.” She
stared at Kunta. “’Specially dem callin’ deyselves
Christians.”
She looked at him again, a slyness in her eyes. “What
you think me an’ Aunt Sukey an’ Sister Mandy be’s talkin’
’bout dese Sundays massa think we jes’ singin’ an’
prayin’? I follows white folks close. Take dem Quakers. Dey
was ’gainst slavin’ even fo’ dat Rebolution, I means right
here in Virginia,” she went on. “An’ plenty o’ dem was
massas ownin’ a heap o’ niggers. But den preachers
commence to sayin’ niggers was human bein’s, wid rights
to be free like anybody else, an’ you ’members some
Quaker massas started to lettin’ dey niggers loose, an’
even helpin’ ’em git up Nawth. By now it done got to where
de Quakers dat’s still keepin’ dey niggers is bein’ talked
’bout by de res’, an’ I’se heared if dey still don’t let dem
niggers go, dey gwine git disowned by dey church. Gwine
on right today, sho’ is!” Bell exclaimed.
“An’ dem Methodists is de nex’ bes’. I ’members readin’
ten, leben years back, Methodists called a great big
meetin’ in Baltimore, an’ finally dey ’greed slavin’ was
’gainst Gawd’s laws an’ dat anybody callin’ hisself Christian

wouldn’t have it did to deyselves. So it’s mostly de
Methodists an’ Quakers makin’ church fuss to git laws to
free niggers. Dem Baptist an’ Presbyterian white folks—
dat’s what massa an’ all de Wallers is—well, dey seems
like to me jes’ halfhearted. Dey’s mostly worried ’bout dey
own freedom to worship like dey pleases, an’ den how dey
can keep a clear conscience an’ dey niggers bofe.”
For all of Bell’s talk of whites who were against slavery—
even though she had read some of it in the massa’s own
newspaper—Kunta had never once heard a toubob opinion
expressed that was not absolutely the opposite. And during
that spring and summer of 1792, the massa shared his
buggy with some of the biggest and richest massas,
politicians, lawyers, and merchants in the state. Unless
something else was more pressing, their ever-ready topic
of conversation was the problems created for them by
blacks.
Whoever would successfully manage slaves, someone
would always say, must first understand that their African
pasts of living in jungles with animals gave them a natural
inheritance of stupidity, laziness, and unclean habits, and
that the Christian duty of those God had blessed with
superiority was to teach these creatures some sense of
discipline, morality, and respect for work—through
example, of course, but also with laws and punishment as
needed, although encouragement and rewards should
certainly be given to those who proved deserving.
Any laxity on the part of whites, the conversation always
continued, would simply invite the kind of dishonesty, tricks,
and cunning that came naturally to a lower species, and the
bleatings of antislavery societies and others like them could
come only from those, particularly in the North, who had
never owned any black ones themselves or tried to run a
plantation with them; such people couldn’t be expected to
realize how one’s patience, heart, spirit, and very soul could
be strained to the breaking point by the trials and burdens
of owning slaves.
Kunta had been listening to the same outrageous
nonsense for so long that it had become like a litany to him,

and he hardly paid any attention to it anymore. But
sometimes, while he drove along, he couldn’t help asking
himself why it was that his countrymen didn’t simply kill
every toubob who set foot on African soil. He was never
able to give himself an answer that he was able to accept.

CHAPTER 71
It was about the noon hour on a sultry day late in August
when Aunt Sukey came waddling as fast as she could out
to the fiddler among his tomato plants and—between
gasps—told him that she was worried to death about the
old gardener. When he didn’t come to her cabin for
breakfast, she hadn’t thought anything about it, she said
breathlessly, but when he didn’t appear for lunch either, she
became concerned, went to his cabin door, knocked, and
called as loudly as she could, but got no answer, became
alarmed, and thought she’d better come to find out if the
fiddler had seen him anywhere. He hadn’t.
“Knowed it somehow or ’nother even ’fore I went in dere,”
the fiddler told Kunta that night. And Kunta said that he had
been unable to explain an eerie feeling he had himself as
he had driven the massa homeward that afternoon. “He
was jes’ lyin’ dere in bed real peaceful like,” said the
fiddler, “wid a l’il smile on ’is face. Look like he sleepin’. But
Aunt Sukey say he awready waked up in heab’m.” He said
he had gone to take the sad news out to those working in
the fields, and the boss field hand Cato returned with him to
help wash the body and place it on a cooling board. Then
they had hung the old gardener’s sweat-browned straw hat
on the outside of his door in the traditional sign of mourning
before the fieldworkers returned and gathered in front of the
cabin to pay their last respects, and then Cato and another
field hand went to dig a grave.
Kunta returned to his cabin feeling doubly grieved—not
only because the gardener was dead, but also because he
hadn’t been visiting him as much as he could have ever
since Kizzy was born. It had just seemed that there was
hardly ever enough time anymore; and now it was too late.
He arrived to find Bell in tears, which he expected, but he
was taken aback at the reason she gave for crying. “Jes’
always seem like to me he was de daddy I ain’t never
seed,” she sobbed. “Don’t know how come I didn’t never let

him know, but it ain’t gon’ never seem de same widout him
bein’ roun’ here.” She and Kunta ate their supper in silence
before taking Kizzy with them—bundled against the cool
autumn night—to join the others “settin’ wid de dead” until
late into the night.
Kunta sat a little apart from the others, with the restless
Kizzy on his lap during the first hour of prayers and soft
singing, and then some hushed conversation was begun by
Sister Mandy, asking if anyone there could recall the old
man ever having mentioned any living relatives. The fiddler
said, “One time ’way back I ’members he said he never
knowed his mammy. Dat’s all I ever heared him say of
family.” Since the fiddler had been the closest among them
to the old man, and he would know if anyone did, it was
decided that there was probably no one to whom word
should be sent.
Another prayer was said, another song was sung, then
Aunt Sukey said, “Seem like he done always belonged to
some a’ de Wallers. I’se heared him talk ’bout de massa
ridin’ on his shoulders as a boy, so I reckon dat’s why
massa bring him here later on when he got his own big
house.”
“Massa real sorry, too,” said Bell. “He say for me to tell
y’all won’t be no workin’ for half a day tomorra.”
“Well, leas’ he gwine git buried right,” said Ada, the fieldhand mother of the boy Noah, who sat impassively beside
her. “It’s aplenty o’ massas jes’ ’lows you to quit workin’
long enough to come look at de dead nigger ’fore he git
stuck in de ground still warm.”
“Well, all dese Wallers is quality white folks, so wouldn’t
none us here have to worry ’bout dat,” said Bell.
Others started talking then about how rich plantation
owners sometimes staged very elaborate funerals for
usually either longtime big-house cooks or for the old
mammies who had suckled and helped to raise two or even
three broods of the family’s children. “Dey even gits buried
in de white folks’ graveyards, wid flat rocks to mark where
dey is.”
What a heartwarming—if somewhat belated—reward for

a lifetime of toil, thought Kunta bitterly. He remembered the
gardener telling him that he had come to the massa’s big
house as a strong young stablehand, which he had
remained for many years until he was kicked badly by a
horse. He stayed on the job, but gradually he had become
more and more disabled, and finally Massa Waller had told
him to spend his remaining years doing whatever he felt
able to do. With Kunta as his assistant, he had tended the
vegetable garden until he was too feeble to do even that,
and from then on had spent most of his time weaving
cornshucks into hats and straw into chairbottoms and fans,
until advancing arthritis had crippled even his fingers. Kunta
recalled another old man he had seen now and then at a
rich big house across the county. Though he had long since
been allowed to retire, he demanded every morning that
some younger blacks carry him out to the garden, where he
would lie on his side plucking weeds with gnarled hands
among the flowerbeds of his equally old and crippled
beloved lifetime missis. And these were the lucky ones,
Kunta knew. Many old folks began to get beaten when they
were no longer able to perform their previous quota of
work, and finally they got sold away for perhaps twenty or
thirty dollars to some “po’ white trash” farmer—with
aspirations of rising into the planter class—who worked
them literally to death.
Kunta was snapped out of those thoughts as everyone
rose from their seats all around him, said a final prayer, and
headed wearily home for a few hours of sleep that were left
before daybreak.
Right after breakfast, the fiddler dressed the old man in
the worn dark suit the old man had been given many years
before by Massa Waller’s daddy. His few other clothes had
been burned, since whoever might wear a dead person’s
clothes would soon die too, Bell told Kunta. Then Cato tied
the body on a wide board that he had shaped to a point at
both ends with an ax.
A little while later, Massa Waller came out of the big
house carrying his big black Bible and fell in behind the
slave-row people as they walked with a peculiar pausing,

hitching step behind the body being drawn on a mule cart.
They were softly chanting a song Kunta had never heard
before: “In de mawnm’, when I gits dere, gwine tell my
Jesus hi’dy! Hi’dy! . . . In de mawnin’, gwine to rise up, tell
my Jesus hi’dy! Hi’dy! . . . ” They kept on singing all the way
to the slave graveyard, which Kunta had noticed everyone
avoided in a deep fear of what they called “ghoses” and
“haints,” which he felt must bear some resemblance to his
Africa’s evil spirits. His people also avoided the burial
ground, but out of consideration for the dead whom they
didn’t wish to disturb, rather than out of fear.
When Massa Waller stopped on one side of the grave,
his slaves on the other, old Aunt Sukey began to pray. Then
a young field-hand woman named Pearl sang a sad song,
“Hurry home, my weary soul . . . I heared from heab’m
today.... Hurry ’long, my weary soul . . . my sin’s forgived,
an’ my soul’s set free.... ” And then Massa Waller spoke
with his head bowed, “Josephus, you have been a good
and faithful servant. May God rest and bless your soul.
Amen.” Through his sorrow, Kunta was surprised to hear
that the old gardener had been called “Josephus.” He
wondered what the gardener’s true name had been—the
name of his African forefathers—and to what tribe they had
belonged. He wondered if the gardener himself had known.
More likely he had died as he had lived—without ever
learning who he really was. Through misted eyes, Kunta
and the others watched as Cato and his helper lowered the
old man into the earth he had spent so many years making
things grow in. When the shovelfuls of dirt began to thud
down onto his face and chest, Kunta gulped and blinked
back the tears as the women around him began to weep
and the men to clear their throats and blow their noses.
As they trudged silently back from the graveyard, Kunta
thought how the family and close friends of one who had
died in Juffure would wail and roll in ashes and dust within
their huts while the other villagers danced outside, for most
African people believed that there could be no sorrow
without happiness, no death without life, in that cycle that
his own father had explained to him when his beloved

Grandma Yaisa had died. He remembered that Omoro had
told him, “Stop weeping now, Kunta,” and explained that
Grandma had only joined another of the three peoples in
every village—those who had gone to be with Allah, those
who were still living, and those who were yet to be born. For
a moment, Kunta thought he must try to explain that to Bell,
but he knew she wouldn’t understand. His heart sank—until
he decided a moment later that this would become another
of the many things he would one day tell Kizzy about the
homeland she would never see.

CHAPTER 72
The death of the gardener continued to weigh so heavily on
Kunta’s mind that Bell finally said something about it one
evening after Kizzy went to bed.
“Looka here, Kunta, I knows how you felt ’bout dat
gardener, but ain’t it ’bout time you snap out of it an’ jine de
livin’?” He just glared at her. “Suit yo’se’f. But ain’t gwine be
much of a secon’ birfday fo’ Kizzy nex’ Sunday wid you
mopin’ roun’ like dis.”
“I be fine,” said Kunta stiffly, hoping Bell couldn’t tell that
he’d forgotten all about it.
He had five days to make Kizzy a present. By Thursday
afternoon he had carved a beautiful Mandinka doll out of
pine wood, rubbed it with linseed oil and lampblack, then
polished it until it shone like the ebony carvings of his
homeland. And Bell, who had long since finished making
her a dress, was in the kitchen—dipping two tiny pink
candles to put on the chocolate cake Aunt Sukey and Sister
Mandy were going to help them eat on Sunday evening—
when Massa John’s driver Roosby arrived in the buggy.
Bell had to bite her tongue when the massa, beaming,
called her in to announce that Missy Anne had persuaded
her parents to let her spend an entire weekend with her
uncle; she’d be arriving tomorrow evening. “Make sure you
have a guest room ready,” said the massa. “And why don’t
you bake a cake or something for Sunday? My niece tells
me your little girl is celebrating a birthday, and she’d like to
have a party—just the two of them—up in her room. Anne
also asked if she could spend the night with her up here in
the house, and I said that would be all right, so be sure to
prepare a pallet for the floor at the foot of the bed.”
When Bell broke the news to Kunta—adding that the
cake she was going to make would have to be served in
the big house instead of their cabin, and that Kizzy was
going to be so busy partying with Missy Anne that they
wouldn’t be able to have a party of their own—Kunta was

so angry that he couldn’t speak or even look at her.
Stomping outside, he went straight to the barn, where he’d
hidden the doll under a pile of straw, and pulled it out.
He had vowed to Allah that this kind of thing would never
happen to his Kizzy—but what could he do? He felt such a
sickening sense of frustration that he could almost begin to
understand why these blacks finally came to believe that
resisting the toubob was as useless as a flower trying to
keep its head above the falling snow. But then, staring at
the doll, he thought of the black mother he’d heard about
who had bashed out her infant’s brains against the auction
block, screaming, “Ain’t gon’ do to her what you done to
me!” And he raised the doll over his head to dash it against
the wall, then lowered it. No, he could never do that to her.
But what about escape? Bell herself had mentioned it once.
Would she really go? And if she would, could they ever
make it—at their age, with his half foot, with a child barely
old enough to walk? He hadn’t seriously considered the
idea for many years, but he did know the region by now as
well as he did the plantation itself. Maybe ...
Dropping the doll, he got up and walked back to the
cabin. But Bell started talking before he got the chance to.
“Kunta, I feels de same as you, but listen to me! I ruther dis
dan her growin’ up a fiel’-han’ young’un like dat l’il ol’ Noah.
He ain’t but two years older’n Kizzy, an’ awready dey done
started takin’ him out dere to pullin’ weeds an’ totin’ water.
Don’ care how else you feels, seem like you got to ’gree
wid dat.” As usual, Kunta said nothing, but he had seen and
done enough during his quarter-century years as a slave to
know that the life of a field hand was the life of a farm
animal, and he would rather die than be responsible for
sentencing his daughter to such a fate.
Then one evening a few weeks later, he arrived home to
find Bell waiting at the door with the cup of cold milk he
always looked forward to after a long drive. When he sat
down in his rocking chair to wait for supper, she came up
behind him and—without even being asked—rubbed his
back in just the spot where she knew it always hurt after a
day at the reins. When she set a plate of his favorite African

stew in front of him, he knew she must be trying to soften
him up for something, but he knew enough not to ask her
what. All the way through supper she chattered even more
than usual about things that mattered even less than usual,
and he was beginning to wonder if she’d ever get around to
it when, about an hour after supper, as they were getting
ready to go to bed, she stopped talking for a long moment,
took a deep breath, and put her hand on his arm. He knew
this was it.
“Kunta, I don’ know how to tell you this, so I’ll jes’ spit it
out. Massa done tol’ me he promise Missy Anne to drop
Kizzy off at Massa John’s to spen’ de day wid her when he
pass by dere on his roun’s tomorra.”
This was too much. It was outrageous enough to have to
sit by and watch while Kizzy was turned slowly into a wellmannered lap dog, but now that she’d been housebroken,
they wanted him to deliver the animal to its new keeper.
Kunta shut his eyes, struggling to contain his rage, then
leaped up from his chair—pulling his arm viciously away
from Bell—and bolted out the door. While she lay sleepless
in their bed that night, he sat sleepless in the stable
beneath his harnesses. Both of them were weeping.
When they pulled up in front of Massa John’s house the
next morning, Missy Anne ran out to meet them before
Kunta even had the chance to lift Kizzy to the ground. She
didn’t even say goodbye, he thought bitterly, hearing behind
them the pealings of girlish laughter as he swerved the
horses back down the driveway toward the main road.
It was late afternoon and he had been waiting several
hours for the massa outside a big house about twenty miles
down the road when a slave came out and told him that
Massa Waller might have to sit up all night with their sick
missy, and for Kunta to come back for him the next day.
Morosely, Kunta obeyed, arriving to find that Missy Anne
had begged her sickly mother to let Kizzy stay overnight.
Deeply relieved when the reply came that their noise had
given her a headache, Kunta was soon rolling back
homeward again with Kizzy holding on and bouncing
beside him on the narrow driver’s seat.

As they rode along, it dawned on Kunta that this was the
first time he had been absolutely alone with her since the
night he had told her what her name was. He felt a strange
and mounting exhilaration as they drove on into the
gathering dusk. But he also felt rather foolish. As much
thought as he had given to his plans for and his
responsibilities to this firstborn, he found himself uncertain
how to act. Abruptly he lifted Kizzy up onto his lap.
Awkwardly he felt her arms, her legs, her head, as she
squirmed and stared at him curiously. He lifted her again,
testing how much she weighed. Then, very gravely, he
placed the reins within her warm, small palms—and soon
Kizzy’s happy laughter seemed the most delightful sound
he had ever heard.
“You pretty l’il gal,” he said to her finally. She just looked
at him. “You look jes’ like my little brudder Madi.”
She just kept looking at him. “Fa!” he said, pointing to
himself. She looked at his finger. Tapping his chest, he
repeated, “Fa.” But she had turned her attention back to the
horses. Flicking the reins, she squealed, “Giddup!”
imitating something else she’d heard him say. She smiled
proudly up at him, but he looked so hurt that it faded quickly,
and they rode on the rest of the way in silence.
It was weeks later, while they were riding home from a
second visit with Missy Anne, that Kizzy leaned over toward
Kunta, stuck her chubby little finger against his chest, and
with a twinkle in her eye, said, “Fa!”
He was thrilled. “Ee to mu Kizzy leh!” he said, taking her
finger and pointing it back at her. “Yo’ name Kizzy.” He
paused. “Kizzy!” She began to smile, recognizing her own
name. He pointed toward himself. “Kunta Kinte.”
But Kizzy seemed perpelxed. She pointed at him: “Fa!”
This time they both smiled wide.
By midsummer Kunta was delighted with how fast Kizzy
was learning the words he was teaching her—and how
much she seemed to be enjoying their rides together. He
began to think there might be hope for her yet. Then one
day she happened to repeat a word or two of Mandinka
when she was alone with Bell, who later had sent Kizzy over

to Aunt Sukey’s for supper and was waiting for Kunta when
he got home that night.
“Ain’t you got no sense atall, man?” she shouted. “Don’t
you know you better pay me ’tention—git dat chile an’ all us
in bad trouble wid dat mess! You better git in yo’ hard head
she ain’t no African!” Kunta never had come so close to
striking Bell. Not only had she committed the unthinkable
offense of raising her voice to her husband, but even worse,
she had disowned his blood and his seed. Could not one
breathe a word of one’s true heritage without fearing
punishment from some toubob? Yet something warned him
not to vent the wrath he felt, for any head-on collision with
Bell might somehow end his buggy trips with Kizzy. But then
he thought she couldn’t do that without telling the massa
why, and she would never dare to tell. Even so, he couldn’t
comprehend what had ever possessed him to marry any
woman born in toubob land.
While he was waiting for the massa to finish a house call
at a nearby plantation the next day, another buggy driver
told Kunta the latest story he’d heard about Toussaint, a
former slave who had organized a large army of black
rebels in Haiti and was leading them successfully against
not only the French but also the Spanish and the English.
Toussaint, the driver said, had learned about war from
reading books about famous ancient fighters named
“Alexander the Great” and “Julius Caesar,” and that these
books had been given to him by his former massa, who he
later helped escape from Haiti to the “Newnited States.”
Over the past few months, Toussaint had become for Kunta
a hero, ranking second in stature only to the legendary
Mandinka warrior Sundiata, and Kunta could hardly wait to
get back home and pass this fascinating story along to the
others.
He forgot to tell them. Bell met him at the stable with the
news that Kizzy had come down with a fever and broken out
in bumps. The massa called it “mumps,” and Kunta was
worried until Bell told him it was only normal in young’uns.
When he learned later that Missy Anne had been ordered
to stay away until Kizzy recovered—for at least two weeks

—he was even a little bit happy about it. But Kizzy had been
sick only a few days when Massa John’s driver Roosby
showed up with a fully dressed toubob doll from Missy
Anne. Kizzy fell in love with it. She sat in bed hugging the
doll close, rocking it back and forth, exclaiming with her
eyes half shut, “Jes’ so pretty!” Kunta left without a word
and stormed across the yard to the barn. The doll was still
in the loft where he’d dropped it and forgotten it months
before. Wiping it off on his sleeve, he carried it back to the
cabin and almost shoved it at Kizzy. She laughed with
pleasure when she saw it, and even Bell admired it. But
Kunta could see, after a few minutes, that Kizzy liked the
toubob doll better, and for the first time in his life, he was
furious with his daughter.
It didn’t make him any happier to notice how eagerly the
two girls made up for the weeks of being together they had
missed. Although sometimes Kunta was told to take Kizzy
to play at Missy Anne’s house, it was no secret that Missy
Anne preferred to visit at her uncle’s, since her mother was
quick to complain of headaches because of the noise they
made, and would even resort to fainting spells as a final
weapon, according to their cook, Omega. But she said, “ol’
missy” had her match in her quick-tongued daughter.
Roosby told Bell one day that his missis had yelled at the
girls, “You’re actin’ just like niggers!” and Missy Anne had
shot back, “Well, niggers has more fun than us, ’cause they
ain’t got nothin’ to worry about!” But the two girls made all
the noise they pleased at Massa Waller’s. Kunta seldom
drove the buggy either way along the flowered drive without
hearing the girls shrieking somewhere as they romped in
the house, the yards, the garden, and—despite Bell’s best
efforts to prevent it—even in the chicken coops, the hog
pen, and the barn, as well as the unlocked slave-row
cabins.
One afternoon, while Kunta was off with the massa, Kizzy
took Missy Anne into her cabin to show her Kunta’s gourd
of pebbles, which she had discovered and become
fascinated with while she was home with the mumps. Bell,
who happened to walk in just as Kizzy was reaching into the

mouth of the gourd, took one look and yelled, “Git ’way from
yo’ daddy’s rocks! Dey’s how he tell how ol’ he is!” The next
day Roosby arrived with a letter for the massa from his
brother, and five minutes later Massa Waller called Bell into
the drawing room, the sharpness of his tone frightening her
before she left the kitchen. “Missy Anne told her parents
about something she saw in your cabin. What is this African
voodoo about rocks being put into a gourd every full
moon?” he demanded.
Her mind racing, Bell blurted, “Rocks? Rocks, Massa?”
“You know very well what I mean!” said the massa.
Bell forced a nervous giggle. “Oh, I knows what you’s
talkin’’bout. Nawsuh, Massa, ain’t no voodoo. Ol’ African
nigger I got jes cain’t count, dat’s all, Massa. So every new
moon, he drop l’il rock in de gourd so all dem rocks say
how ol’ he is!”
Massa Waller, still frowning, gestured for Bell to return to
the kitchen. Ten minutes later she charged into the cabin,
snatched Kizzy from Kunta’s lap, and laid into her rear end
with an open hand—almost screaming, “Don’t you never
bring dat gal in here no mo’, I’ll wring yo’ neck, you hear
me!”
After sending the weeping Kizzy fleeing to bed, Bell
managed to calm herself enough to explain to Kunta. “I
knows dem gourd an’ rocks ain’t no harm,” she said, “but it
jes’ go to show you what I tol’ you ’bout dem African things
brings troubles! An’ massa don’t never forgit nothin’!”
Kunta felt such an impotent fury that he couldn’t eat
supper. After driving the massa nearly every day for over
twenty rains, Kunta was amazed and enraged that it could
still be a matter of suspicion that he simply recorded his
age by dropping stones into a gourd.
It was another two weeks before the tension subsided
enough for Missy Anne’s visits to resume, but once they did
it was as if the incident had never happened; Kunta was
almost sorry. With the berry season in full bloom, the girls
ranged up and down the vine-covered fencerows finding
the dark green wild strawberry patches and coming home
with full pails, their hands—and mouths—tinted crimson.

Other days they would return with such treasures as snail
shells, a wren’s nest, or a crusted old arrowhead, all of
which they would exhibit gleefully to Bell before hiding them
somewhere with great secrecy, whereafter they might make
mud pies. By the midafternoons, after trooping into the
kitchen covered to the elbows with mud-pie batter and
being ordered straight outside again to wash up at the well,
the joyfully exhausted pair would eat snacks that Bell had
ready for them and then lie down together on a quilt pallet
for a nap. If Missy Anne was staying overnight, after her
supper with the massa, she would keep him company until
her bedtime, when he would send her out to tell Bell that it
was time for her story. And Bell would bring in an equally
worn-out Kizzy and tell them both about the further
adventures of Br’er Rabbit getting tricked by Br’er Fox, who
finally got tricked himself.
Kunta resented this deepening intimacy between the two
girls even more intensely than when he saw it coming in
Kizzy’s crib. Part of him, he had to admit, was pleased that
Kizzy was enjoying her girlhood so much, and he had come
to agree with Bell that even being a toubob’s pet was better
than having to spend her life in the fields. But he was sure
that every now and then he could sense even in Bell a
certain uneasiness when she was watching the girls
romping and playing so closely together. He would dare to
think that at least some of those times, Bell must have felt
and feared the same things he did. Some nights in their
cabin, as he watched her caressing Kizzy in her lap and
humming one of her “Jesus” songs, he would have the
feeling, as she looked down at the sleepy face, that she
was afraid for her, that she wanted to warn her child about
caring too much for any toubob, no matter how mutual the
affection seemed. Kizzy was too young to understand such
things, but Bell knew all too well what wrenching anguish
could result from trusting toubob; had they not sold her
away from her first two babies? There was no way even to
guess at what might lie ahead for Kizzy, but also for him
and Bell. But he knew one thing: Allah would wreak terrible
vengeance on any toubob who ever harmed their Kizzy.

CHAPTER 73
Two Sundays every month, Kunta drove the massa to
church at the Waller Meetinghouse about five miles from
the plantation. The fiddler had told him that not only the
Wallers but also several other important white families had
built their own meetinghouses around the county. Kunta had
been surprised to discover that the services also were
attended by some of the neighboring lesser white families
and even some of the area’s “po’ crackers,” whom the
buggy had often passed as they came and went on foot,
carrying their shoes by the strings over their shoulders.
Neither the massa nor any of the other “quality folk,” as Bell
called them, ever stopped to offer “po’ crackers” a ride, and
Kunta was glad of it.
There would always be a long, droning sermon between
a lot of equally listless singing and praying, and when it was
finally over, everybody would come trailing outside one by
one and shake hands with the preacher, and Kunta would
notice with amusement how both the “po’ crackers” and
those of the massa’s class would smile and tip their hats at
one another, acting as if their both being white made them
both the same. But then when they would spread their
picnic lunches under the trees, it was always with the two
classes on opposite sides of the churchyard—as if they
had just happened to sit apart.
While he was waiting and watching this solemn rite with
the other drivers one Sunday, Roosby said under his
breath, just loud enough for the others to hear, “Seem like
white folks don’ ’joy dey eatin’ no more’n dey worshipin’.”
Kunta thought to himself that in all the years he had known
Bell, he had always managed to claim some urgent chore
whenever the time came for one of her “Jesus” meetings in
slave row, but all the way from the barn he had heard
enough of the black ones’ caterwauling and carrying on to
convince him that one of the few things about the toubob
that he found worthy of admiration was their preference for

quieter worship.
It was only a week or so later that Bell reminded Kunta
about the “big camp meetin’” she planned to go to in late
July. It had been the blacks’ big summer event every year
since he’d come to the plantation, and since every previous
year he had found an excuse not to go along, he was
amazed that she would still have the nerve to ask him. He
knew little about what went on at these huge gatherings,
beyond that they had to do with Bell’s heathen religion, and
he wanted no part of it. But Bell once more insisted. “I
knows how bad you always wants to go,” she said in her
voice heavy with sarcasm. “Jes’ thought I’d tell you far
’nough ahead so’s you can work it into yo’ plans.”
Kunta couldn’t think of a smart answer, and he didn’t
want to start an argument anyway, so he just said, “I think
about it,” though he had no intention of going.
By the day before the meeting, when he pulled up at the
big-house front door after a trip to the county seat, the
massa said, “I won’t be needing the buggy tomorrow, Toby.
But I’ve given Bell and the other women permission to go to
that camp meeting tomorrow, and I said it would be all right
for you to drive them over in the wagon.”
Churning with anger, positive that Bell had plotted this,
Kunta tied up the horses behind the barn and without taking
the time to unhitch them, headed straight for the cabin. Bell
took one look at him standing in the doorway and said,
“Couldn’t think up no other way to git you dere when Kizzy
git christened.”
“Git what?”
“Christened. Dat mean she jine de church.”
“What church? Dat ‘O Lawd’ religion o’ your’n?”
“Don’ let’s start dat again. Ain’t nothin’ to do wid me.
Missy Anne done ax her folks to take Kizzy to dey
meetin’house on Sundays an’ set in de back whilst dey
prays up front. But she can’t go to no white folks’ church
less’n she christened.”
“Den she ain’t gwine no church!”
“You still don’ unnerstan’, does you, African? It a priv’lege
to be axed to dey church. You say no, de nex’ thing you an

me both out pickin’ cotton.”
As they set out the next morning, Kunta sat rigidly staring
straight ahead from his high driver’s seat, refusing to look
back even at his laughing, excited daughter as she sat on
her mother’s lap, between the other women and their picnic
baskets. For a while, they simply chattered among
themselves, then they began singing: “We-uh climbin’
Jacob’s ladder.... We-uh climbin’ Jacob’s ladder. . . . Weuh climbin’ Jacob’s ladder. . . . soldiers of de Cross. . . . ”
Kunta was so disgusted that he began slapping the reins
across the mules’ rumps, making the buggy lurch forward
and jostling his passengers—but he couldn’t seem to do it
hard enough or often enough to shut them up. He could
even hear Kizzy’s piping little voice among the others. The
toubob didn’t need to steal his child, he thought bitterly, if
his own wife was willing to give her away.
Similarly crowded wagons were coming out of other
plantations’ side roads, and with every happy wave and
greeting as they rode along, Kunta became more and more
indignant. By the time they reached the campground—in a
flowered, rolling meadow— he had worked himself into
such a state that he hardly noticed the dozen or more
wagons that were already there and the others that were
arriving from all directions. As each wagon pulled to a halt,
the occupants would pile noisily out, hooting and hallooing,
soon joining Bell and the others who were kissing and
hugging each other in the milling crowd. Slowly it dawned
on Kunta that he had never seen so many black people
together in one place in toubob land, and he began to pay
attention.
While the women assembled their baskets of food in a
grove of trees, the men began to drift toward a small knoll in
the middle of a meadow. Kunta tethered the mules to a
stake that he drove into the ground, and then sat down
behind the wagon—but in such a way that he could see
everything that went on. After a while, all of the men had
taken seats close to one another on the ground near the top
of the knoll—all excepting four who appeared to be the
oldest among them; they remained standing. And then, as if

by some prearranged signal, the man who seemed to be
the oldest of the four—he was very black and stooped and
thin, with a white beard—suddenly reared back his head
and shouted loudly toward where the women were, “I say,
chilluns of JESUS!”
Unable to believe his eyes or ears, Kunta watched as the
women swiftly turned and shouted as one, “Yes, Lawd!”
then came hurrying and jostling to sit behind the gathered
men. Kunta was astonished at how much it reminded him of
the way the people of Juffure sat at the Council of Elders’
meetings once each moon.
The old man shouted again: “I say—is y’all chilluns of
JESUS?”
“Yes, Lawd!”
Now, the three other old men stepped out in front of the
oldest one, and one after another, they cried out:
“Gon’ come a time we be jes’ GAWD’s slaves!”
“Yes, Lawd!” shouted all who sat on the ground.
“You make youse’f ready, Jesus STAY ready!”
“Yes, Lawd!”
“Know what de Holy Father said to me jes’ now? He say,
‘Ain’t NOBODY strangers!’”
A massed shouting rose, all but drowning out what the
oldest of the four had begun to say. In a strange way even
Kunta felt some of the excitement. Finally the crowd quieted
enough for him to hear what the graybeard was saying.
“Chilluns o’ Gawd, dey is a PROMISE lan’! Dat’s where
ev’y-body b’lieve in Him gon’ go! An’ dem dat b’lieve, dat’s
where dey gon’ LIVE—for all e-terni-ty! . . . ”
Soon the old man was sweating profusely, his arms
flailing the air, his body quivering with the intensity of his
singsong exclamations, his voice rasping with emotion. “It
tell us in de Bible dat de lamb an’ de lion gwine lay down
TOGETHER!” The old man threw his head backward,
flinging his hands toward the sky. “Ain’t gon’ be no massas
an’ slaves NO MO’! Jes’ gon’ be all GAWD’s CHILLUNS!”
Then, suddenly, some woman leaped up and began
shrieking, “O Jesus! O Jesus! O Jesus! O Jesus!” It set off
others around her, and within minutes two dozen or more

women were screaming and jerking themselves about. It
flashed into Kunta’s mind how the fiddler had once told him
that on some plantations where the massas forbade slaves
to worship, they concealed a large iron pot in the woods
nearby, where those who felt the spirit move them would
stick their heads inside and shout, the pot muffling the
noise sufficiently for it not to be heard by the massa or the
overseer.
It was in the middle of this thought that Kunta saw, with
profound shock and embarrassment, that Bell was among
the women who were staggering and screeching. Just then
one of them shouted, “I’se GAWD’s chile!” toppled to the
ground as if felled by a blow, and lay there quivering. Others
joined her and began writhing and moaning on the grass.
Another woman who had been flinging herself violently
about now went as rigid as a post, screaming out, “O
Lawd! Jes’ you, Jesus!”
Kunta could tell that none of them had planned whatever
they were doing. It was just happening as they felt it—the
way his own people danced to the spirits back at home,
acting out what they felt inside. As the shouting and the
twitching began to subside, it occurred to Kunta that this
was the way the dancings in Juffure had ended—seemingly
in exhaustion. And he could see that in some way, these
people, too, seemed to be both spent and at peace with
themselves.
Then, one after another, they began to get up from the
ground and shout out to the others:
“My back pained me so bad till I talked to my Lawd. He
say to me, ‘You stan’ up straight,’ an’ I ain’t hurt since.”
“Didn’t meet my Lawd Jesus till He saved my soul, an’
now I puts my love for Him up against anybody’s!”
There were others. Then, finally, one of the old men led a
prayer, and when it was over everybody shouted “A-MEN!”
and began to sing loudly and with tremendous spirit: “I got
shoes, you got shoes, all Gawd’s chilluns got shoes! Whenuh gits to Heab’m, gon’ put on mah shoes, gon’ walk all
ovah Gawd’s Heab’m! Heab’m! Ev’body tellin’ ’bout
Heab’m ain’t gwine dere! Heab’m! Heab’m! I’m gon’ walk

all ovah Gawd’s Heab’m!”
As they sang the song, they had gotten up from the
ground, one by one, and began to walk very slowly,
following the gray-haired preacher, down from the knoll and
across the meadow. By the time the song ended, they had
reached the banks of a pond on the other side, where the
preacher turned to face them, flanked by the other three
elders, and held up his arms.
“An’ now, brothers an’ sisters, de time is come fo’ yo’
sinners what ain’t been cleansed to wash away yo’ sins in
de River JORDAN!”
“O yeah!” shouted a woman on the bank.
“It’s time to squench out de fires o’ Hell in de holy waters
o’ de Promise LAN’!”
“Say it!” came another shout.
“All dose ready to dive down fo’ dey almighty soul an’
rise up ag’in wid de Lawd, remain standin’. Res’ o’ you
what done been baptize or ain’t ready fo’ Jesus yet,
seddown!”
As Kunta watched in astonishment, all but twelve or
fifteen of them sat down. While the others lined up at the
water’s edge, the preacher and the strongest of the four
elders marched right into the pond, stopping and turning
when they were immersed up to their hips.
Addressing himself to the teen-age girl who was first in
line, the preacher spoke. “Is you ready, chile?” She nodded.
“Den come ahead!”
Grasping both of her arms, the two remaining elders led
her into the pond, stumbling, to meet the others in the
middle. Placing his right hand on the girl’s forehead while
the biggest elder grabbed her shoulders with both hands
from behind and the other two men tightened their grip on
her arms, the preacher said, “O Lawd, let dis chile be wash
clean,” and then he pushed her backward while the man
behind pulled her shoulders back and down until she was
completely under water.
As the bubbles rose to the surface and her limbs began
to thrash the water, they turned their gaze heavenward and
held on tight. Soon she started kicking wildly and heaving

her body violently; it was all they could do to hold her under.
“ALMOST!” the preacher shouted, over the churning
commotion beneath his arms. “NOW!” They pulled her
upward from the water, gasping for breath, spewing water,
struggling frantically as they half carried her back to shore
—and into the arms of her waiting mother.
Then they turned to the next in line—a boy in his early
twenties who stood staring at them, too terrified to move.
They practically had to drag him in. Kunta watched with his
mouth open wider as each person—next a middle-aged
man, then another young girl around twelve, then an elderly
woman who could barely walk—were led one by one into
the pond and subjected to the same incredible ordeal. Why
did they do it? What sort of cruel “Gawd” demanded such
suffering for those who wished to believe in him? How
could half drowning someone wash away his evil? Kunta’s
mind teemed with questions—none of which he could
answer—until finally the last one had been pulled spluttering
from the water.
It must be over, he thought. But the preacher, wiping his
face with his sopping sleeve, stood in the pond and spoke
again: “An’ now, is dey any ’mongst y’all wishes to
consecrate dey chilluns to JESUS dis holy day?” Four
women stood up—the first of them Bell, holding Kizzy by the
hand.
Kunta leaped up beside the wagon. Surely they wouldn’t!
But then he saw Bell leading the way to the bank of the
pond, and began to walk—slowly, uncertainly at first, then
faster and faster—toward the crowd at the water’s edge.
When the preacher beckoned to Bell, she leaned down to
pick up Kizzy in her arms and strode vigorously into the
water. For the first time in twenty-five years, since the day
his foot had been chopped, Kunta began to run—but when
he reached the pond, his foot throbbing, Bell was standing
in the middle at the preacher’s side. Gasping to catch his
breath, Kunta opened his mouth to call out—just as the
preacher began to speak:
“Dearly beloved, we’s gathered here to welcome another
lamb unto de fold! What de chile’s name, sister?”

“Kizzy, reveren’.”
“Lawd ...” he began, placing his left hand under Kizzy’s
head and squeezing his eyes shut.
“Naw!” Kunta shouted hoarsely.
Bell’s head jerked around, her eyes were burning into
his. The preacher stood looking from him to her and back
again. Kizzy began to whimper. “Hush, chile,” Bell
whispered. Kunta felt the hostile stares surrounding him.
Everything hung poised.
Bell broke the stillness. “It’s awright, reveren’. Dat’s jes’
my African husban’. He don’ unnerstan’. I ’splain to him
later. You go ’head.”
Kunta, too stunned to speak, saw the preacher shrug,
turn back to Kizzy, shut his eyes, and start again.
“Lawd, wid his holy water, bless dis chile. . . . What her
name again, sister?”
“Kizzy.”
“Bless dis chile Kizzy and take her wid you safe into dat
Promise Lan’!” With that the preacher dipped his right hand
into the water, flicked a few drops into Kizzy’s face, and
shouted “AMEN!”
Bell turned, carried Kizzy back to shore, trudged up out of
the water, and stood dripping in front of Kunta. Feeling
foolish and ashamed, he looked down at her muddy feet,
then raised his eyes to meet hers, which were wet—with
tears? She put Kizzy in his arms.
“It awright. She jes’ wet,” he said, his rough hand
caressing Kizzy’s face.
“All dat runnin’, you must be hungry. I sure is. Le’s go eat.
I brung fried chicken an’ devil eggs an’ dat sweet tater
custard you can’t never git enough of.”
“Sound good,” said Kunta.
Bell took his arm and they walked slowly back across the
meadow to where their picnic basket sat on the grass in the
shade of a walnut tree.

CHAPTER 74
Bell told Kizzy one night in the cabin, “You’s gwine on seven
years ol’! Fiel-hand young’uns be awready out dere workin’
ey’yday—like dat Noah—so you’s gwine start bein’ some
use to me in de big house!” Knowing by now how her father
felt about such things, Kizzy looked uncertainly at Kunta.
“You hear what yo’ mammy say,” he said without conviction.
Bell already had discussed it with him, and he had to agree
that it was prudent for Kizzy to start doing some work that
was visible to Massa Waller, rather than continue solely as
a playmate for Missy Anne. He privately further liked the
idea of her making herself useful, since in Juffure at her age
mothers started teaching their daughters the skills that
would later enable their fathers to demand a good bride
price from a prospective husband. But he knew Bell didn’t
expect his enthusiasm about anything to bring Kizzy even
closer to the toubob—and take her even farther away from
him and the sense of dignity and heritage he was still
determined to instill in her. When Bell reported a few
mornings later that Kizzy was already learning to polish
silverware, scrub floors, wax woodwork, even to make up
the massa’s bed, Kunta found it difficult to share her pride
in such accomplishments. But when he saw his daughter
emptying then washing the white-enameled slopjar in which
the massa relieved himself at night, Kunta recoiled in
anger, convinced that his worst fears had been fulfilled.
He bridled, too, at the counsel he would hear Bell giving
Kizzy about how to be a personal maid. “Now, you listen to
me good, gal! It ain’t every nigger git chance to work fer
quality white folks like massa. Right off, dat put you ’bove
de rest o’ young ’uns. Now, de big thing is to learn what
massa want without him never havin’ to tell you. You’ gwine
start gittin’ up an’ out early wid me, ’way fo’ massa do.
Dat’s how I gits a head start on ’im—done always b’lieve in
dat. First thing, gwine show you how to whup de dus’ out’n
his coat an’ pants when you hangs ’em out to air on de

clothesline. Jes’ be sho’ you don’t break or scratch none o’
de buttons—” and so on, sometimes for hours at a time.
Not a single evening passed, it seemed to Kunta, without
more instructions, down to the most ridiculous detail. “For
blackin’ his shoes,” she told Kizzy one night, “I shakes up in
ajar l’il simmon beer an’ lampblack wid l’il sweet oil an’
rock candy. Dat stan’ overnight, den shake it up good
again, it make dem black shoes of his’n shine like glass.”
Before he could stand no more of it and retreated for relief
to the fiddler’s hut, Kunta acquired such invaluable
household hints as “if you set a teaspoon o’ black pepper
an’ brown sugar mashed to a paste wid a l’il cow’s cream
in a saucer in a room, ain’t no flies comin’ in dere nohow!”
And that soiled wallpaper was best cleaned by rubbing it
with the crumbly insides of two-day-old biscuits.
Kizzy seemed to be paying attention to her lessons, even
if Kunta didn’t, for Bell reported one day, weeks later, that
the massa had mentioned to her that he was pleased with
the way the andirons in the fireplace had been shining
since Kizzy started polishing them.
But whenever Missy Anne came over for a visit, of
course, the massa didn’t have to say that Kizzy was
excused from work for the duration of her stay. Then, as
always, the two girls would go romping and skipping about,
jumping rope, playing hide-and-seek and a few games they
invented. “Playing nigger,” bursting open a ripe watermelon
and jamming their faces down into its crisp wetness one
afternoon, they ruined the fronts of their dresses, prompting
Bell to send Kizzy yelping with a backhand slap, and to
snap even at Missy Anne. “You knows you’s raised better’n
dat! Ten years ol’, gwine to school, an’ fo’ you knows it
gwine be a high-class missy!”
Though Kunta no longer bothered to complain about it,
he remained a most difficult mate for Bell to deal with
during Missy Anne’s visits and for at least another day
afterward. But whenever Kunta was told to drive Kizzy to
Massa John’s house, it was all he could do to keep from
showing his eagerness to be alone again with his girlchild
in the buggy. By this time, Kizzy had come to understand

that whatever was said during their buggy rides was a
matter between the two of them, so he considered it safer
now to teach her more about his homeland without fear that
Bell would find them out.
Rolling along the dusty Spotsylvania County roads, he
would tell her the Mandinka names of things they passed
along the road. Pointing at a tree, he’d say “yiro,” then
downward at the road, “silo.” As they passed a grazing
cow, he’d say, “ ninsemuso,” and went over a small bridge,
“salo.” Once when they got caught in a sudden shower,
Kunta shouted “sanjio,” waving out at the rain, and when the
sun reappeared, pointing at it, he said “tilo.” Kizzy would
watch his mouth intently as he said each word, then imitate
what she saw with her own lips, repeating it over and over
until she got it right. Soon she began pointing to things
herself and asking him for their Mandinka names. One day
they were hardly beyond the shadow of the big house when
Kizzy poked him in the ribs, tapped her finger above an ear
and whispered, “What you call my head?” “Kungo,” Kunta
whispered back. She tweaked her hair; he said “kuntinyo.”
She pinched her nose; he told her “nungo”; she squeezed
her ear; he said “tulo.” Giggling, Kizzy jerked up her foot
and tapped her large toe. “Sinkumba!” exclaimed Kunta.
Seizing her exploring forefinger, wiggling it, he said
“bulokonding.” Touching her mouth, he said “ da.” Then
Kizzy seized Kunta’s forefinger and pointed it at him. “Fa!”
she exclaimed. He felt overwhelmed with his love for her.
Pointing to a sluggish small river they were passing a
little later, Kunta said “Dat a bolongo.” He told her that in
his homeland he had lived near a river called the “Kamby
Bolongo.” That evening, when on the way back home,
passing by it again, Kizzy pointed, and shouted, “Kamby
Bolongo!” Of course, she didn’t understand when he tried to
explain that this was the Mattaponi River, not the Gambia
River, but he was so delighted that she had remembered
the name at all that it didn’t seem to matter. The Kamby
Bolongo, he said, was much bigger, swifter, and more
powerful than this puny specimen. He wanted to tell her how

the life-giving river was revered by his people as a symbol
of fertility, but he couldn’t find a way to say it, so he told her
about the fish that teemed in it—including the powerful,
succulent kujalo, which sometimes leaped right into a
canoe—and about the vast living carpet of birds that floated
on it until some young boy like himself would jump growling
from the brush on the banks so that he could watch them
rise up and fill the sky like some feathery snow-storm.
Kunta said that reminded him of a time his Grandmother
Yaisa had told him about when Allah sent The Gambia a
plague of locusts so terrible that they darkened the sun and
devoured everything green until the wind shifted and carried
them out to sea, where they finally fell and were eaten by
the fish.
“Do I got a gran’ma?” asked Kizzy.
“You got two—my mammy and yo’ mammy’s mammy.”
“How come dey ain’t wid us?”
“Dey don’ know where we is,” said Kunta. “Does you
know where we is?” he asked her a moment later.
“We’s in de buggy,” Kizzy said.
“I means where does we live.”
“At Massa Waller’s.”
“An where dat is?”
“Dat way,” she said, pointing down the road.
Disinterested in their subject, she said, “Tell me some
more ’bout dem bugs an’ things where you come from.”
“Well, dey’s big red ants knows how to cross rivers on
leafs, dat fights wars an’ marches like a army, an’ builds
hills dey lives in dat’s taller dan a man.”
“Dey soun’ scary. You step on ’em?”
“Not less’n you has to. Every critter got a right to be here
same as you. Even de grass is live an’ got a soul jes’ like
peoples does.”
“Won’t walk on de grass no mo’, den. I stay in de buggy.”
Kunta smiled. “Wasn’t no buggies where I come from.
Walked wherever we was goin’. One time I walked four
days wid my pappy all de way from Juffure to my uncles’
new village.”
“What Joo-fah-ray?”

“Done tol’ you don’ know how many times, dat where I
come from.”
“I thought you was from Africa. Dat Gambia you talks
about in Africa?”
“Gambia a country in Africa. Juffure a village in Gambia.”
“Well, where dey at, Pappy?”
“’Crost de big water.”
“How big dat big water?”
“So big it take near ’bout four moons to get crost it.”
“Four what?”
“Moons. Like you say ‘months.’”
“How come you don’t say months?”
“’Cause moons my word for it.”
“What you call a ‘year’?”
“A rain.”
Kizzy mused briefly.
“How you get ’crost dat big water?”
“In a big boat.”
“Bigger dan dat rowboat we seen dem fo’ mens fishin’
in?”
“Big ’nough to hol’ a hunnud mens.”
“How come it don’ sink?”
“I use to wish it would of.”
“How come?”
“’Cause we all so sick seem like we gon’ die anyhow.”
“How you get sick?”
“Got sick from layin’ in our own mess prac’ly on top each
other.”
“Whyn’t you go de toilet?”
“De toubob had us chained up.”
“Who ‘toubob’?”
“White folks.”
“How come you chained up? You done sump’n wrong?”
“Was jes’ out in de woods near where I live—Juffure—
lookin’ fer a piece o’ wood to make a drum wid, an’ dey
grab me an’ take me off.”
“How ol’ you was?”
“Sebenteen.”
“Dey ask yo’ mammy an’ pappy if’n you could go?”

Kunta looked incredulously at her. “Woulda took dem too
if’n dey could. To dis day my fam’ly don’ know where I is.”
“You got brothers an’ sisters?”
“Had three brothers. Maybe mo’ by now. Anyways, dey’s
all growed up, prob’ly got chilluns like you.”
“We go see dem someday?”
“We cain’t go nowhere.”
“We’s gon’ somewheres now.”
“Jes’ Massa John’s. We don’t show up, dey have de
dogs out at us by sundown.”
“’Cause dey be worried ’bout us?”
“’Cause we b’longs to dem, jes’ like dese hosses pullin’
us.”
“Like I b’longs to you an’ mammy?”
“You’se our young’un. Dat different.”
“Missy Anne say she want me fo’ her own.”
“You ain’t no doll fo’ her to play wid.”
“I plays wid her, too. She done tole me she my bes’
frien’.”
“You can’t be nobody’s frien’ an’ slave both.”
“How come, Pappy?”
“’Cause frien’s don’t own one ’nother.”
“Don’t mammy an’ you b’long to one ’nother? Ain’t y’all
frien’s?”
“Ain’t de same. We b’longs to each other ’cause we
wants to,’cause we loves each other.”
“Well, I loves Missy Anne, so I wants to b’long to her.”
“Couldn’t never work out.”
“What you mean?”
“You couldn’t be happy when y’all grow up.”
“Would too. I bet you wouldn’t be happy.”
“Yo sho’ right ’bout dat!”
“Aw, Pappy, I couldn’t never leave you an’ Mammy.”
“An’ chile, speck we couldn’t never let you go, neither!”

CHAPTER 75
Late one afternoon, the driver for Massa Waller’s parents
at Enfield brought him their invitation to attend a dinner
party in honor of an important Richmond businessman who
had stopped for a night’s lodging on his way to
Fredericksburg. About a dozen buggies were already
parked outside the Enfield big house when Kunta arrived
with the massa soon after dark.
Though he had been there many times in the eight years
since he and Bell were married, it had been only during the
past few months that the fat black cook Hattie, who had
been so smitten with Kunta, decided to begin speaking
with him again—ever since he had brought Kizzy along with
Missy Anne one day on a visit to her grandparents. Tonight,
when he went to the kitchen door to say hello—and for
something to eat—she invited him in to visit while she, her
helper, and four serving women completed their
preparations for dinner; Kunta thought that he had never
seen so much food bubbling in so many pots and pans.
“How dat l’il puddin’-pie young’un o’ your’n?” Hattie
asked between sips and sniffs.
“She fine,” said Kunta. “Bell got her learnin’ how to cook
now. S’prise me other night wid a apple betty she done
made.”
“Dat l’il dickens. Nex’ thing you know, I be eatin’ her
cookies’stead o’ her eatin’ mine. She musta put away half
a jar o’ my ginger snaps las’ time she here.”
With a last look at the mouth-watering three or four kinds
of breads that were baking in the oven, Hattie turned to the
oldest of the serving women, in their starched yellow
smocks, and said, “We’se ready. Go tell missis.” As the
woman disappeared through the swinging door, she told
the other three, “I come after y’all wid a ladle if’n yo’ slops
one drop o’ soup on my bes’ linen when you settin’ down de
bowls. Git to work now, Pearl,” she said to her teen-age
helper. “Git dem turnip greens, de sweet cawn, squash, an’

okra in de good china tureens whilst I wrestles dis here
saddle o’ mutton onto de carvin’ bo’d.”
A few minutes later, one of the serving women came
back in, whispered intently to Hattie at some length, and
then hurried back out again. Hattie turned to Kunta.
“You ’members few months back when one dem tradin’
boats got raided somewheres on de big water by dat
France?”
Kunta nodded. “Fiddler say he heared dat Pres’dent
Adams so mad he sent de whole Newnited States Navy to
whup ’em.”
“Well, dey sho’ did. Louvina jes’ now tol’ me dat man in
dere from Richmon’ say dey done took away eighty boats
b’longin’ to dat France. She say de white folks in dere act
like dey nigh ’bout ready to start singin’ an’ dancin’ ’bout
teachin’ dat France a lesson.”
As she spoke, Kunta had begun digging into the heaping
plateful of food she had set before him, while he marveled
at the very sight of the roast beef, baked ham, turkey,
chicken, and duck she was now busily arranging on big
platters waiting to be served. He had just swallowed a
mouthful of buttered sweet potato when the four serving
women came bustling back into the kitchen—all loaded
down with empty bowls and spoons. “De soup’s et!” Hattie
announced to Kunta. A moment later the serving women
were trooping out again with heaped trays, and Hattie
mopped her face and said, “Got ’bout fo’ty minutes befo’
dey ready fo’ dessert. You was gon’ say sump’n befo’?”
“Jes’ gon’ say eighty boats don’ make me no difference,”
said Kunta, “long’s white folks messin’ wid one ’nother
’stead o’ us. Seem like dey ain’t happy less’n dey’s
messin’ wid somebody.”
“’Pend who dey messin’ wid, way I sees it,” said Hattie.
“Las’ year was a mulatto led a re-volt ’gainst dat Toussaint,
an’ he mighta won if’n de Pres’dent hadn’t of sent his boats
down dere to he’p Toussaint.”
“Heared Massa Waller say Toussaint ain’t got sense
’nough to be no gen’l, let alone run no country on his own,”
said Kunta. “He say jes’ watch, all dem slaves dat done got

free in dat Haiti gwine wind up whole lot wuss off dan dey
was under dey ol’ massas. ’Cose, dat’s what white folks
hopin’. But I specks dey’s awready better off workin’ de
plantations deyselves.”
One of the serving women, who had returned to the
kitchen and was listening to the conversation, spoke up:
“Dat what dey’s talkin’’bout in dere right now—free niggers.
Say it’s way too many, thirteen thousan’ jes’ here in
Virginia. De jedge say he all fo’ freein’ niggers dat do
sump’n outstandin’, like dem what fit in dat
Revolution’longside dey massas, or dem what tol’ white
folks ’bout any nigger uprisin’ plan, or dat nigger dat come
up wid dat herb medicine dat even white folks claim cure
near ’bout everythin’. De jedge say he feel massas got de
right in de wills to free ol’ faithful niggers. But him an’
ev’ybody in dere say dey’s dead set ’gainst dem Quakers
and some other white folks settin’ dey niggers free fo’
nothin.” The serving woman headed for the door, adding,
“Jedge say mark his words, some new laws gwine be
made to put a crimp in dat right soon.”
Hattie asked Kunta, “What yo’ think o’ dat Massa
Alexander Hamilton up Nawth sayin’ all free niggers oughta
be sent to Africa’cause niggers an’ white folks too different
an’ ain’t gwine never git’long?”
“He right, dat’s what I thinks,” said Kunta. “But white folks
talks dat an’ keeps bringin’ mo’ from Africa!”
“You know why well’s I do,” said Hattie. “Puts ’em down in
Georgia an’ de Carolinas to keep up wid de cotton crop
every since dat cotton gin come in few years back. Same
reason plenty massas’roun’ here sellin’ dey niggers off
down South for much as two, three times what dey paid fo’
dem.”
“Fiddler say de big massas down South got mean po’
cracker oberseers drivin’ niggers like mules clearin’ lan’ for
new cottonfiel’s,” said Kunta.
“Yeah, it’s how come de papers lately so full o’ notices
’bout runaways,” said Hattie.
Just then the serving women began returning to the
kitchen with dirty plates and platters. Hattie beamed

proudly. “Look like dey’s done et all dey can hol’. ’Bout now,
massa pourin’ de champagne whilst de table git cleared fo’
dessert,” she told Kunta. “See how you like dese plum
puddin’ tarts.” She set one on a saucer in front of him.
“’Sides dat dey’s gittin’ brandied peaches in dere, but I
recollecks you don’t touch no liquor.”
Enjoying the succulent tart, Kunta found himself recalling
a runaway slave advertisement that Bell had read to him
recently from the Gazette. “Tall mulatto wench,” it said, “very
large breasts of which the right one has a deep scar. A sly
liar and thief, who may be showing a large forged pass,
since previous owner let her learn to write some, or who
may be claiming herself a free nigger.”
Hattie sat down heavily, fingered a brandied peach from
a jar and popped it into her mouth. Glancing across the
kitchen at two high tubs filled with glasses, dishes, cutlery,
and utensils yet to be washed and put away, she let out a
loud sigh and said wearily, “Know one thing, sho’ be glad to
see my bed dis night, ’cause Lawd, I jes’ plum wo’ out.”

CHAPTER 76
For many years now, Kunta had gotten up every morning
before dawn, earlier than anyone else on slave row—so
early that some of the others were convinced that “dat
African” could see in the dark like a cat. Whatever they
wanted to think was fine with him as long as he was left
alone to slip away to the barn, where he would face the first
faint streaking of the day prostrated between two large
bundles of hay, offering up his daily suba prayer to Allah.
Afterward, by the time he had pitched some hay into the
horses’ feed trough, he knew that Bell and Kizzy would be
washed, dressed, and ready to get things under way in the
big house, and the boss field hand Cato would be up and
out with Ada’s son Noah, who would soon be ringing the
bell to wake the other slaves.
Almost every morning, Noah would nod and say “Mornin’”
with such solemn reserve that he reminded Kunta of the
Jaloff people in Africa, of whom it was said that if one
greeted you in the morning, he had uttered his last good
word for the day. But although they had said little to each
other, he liked Noah, perhaps because he reminded Kunta
of himself at about the same age—the serious manner, the
way he went about his work and minded his own business,
the way he spoke little but watched everything. He had often
noticed Noah doing a thing that he also did—standing
somewhere with his eyes quietly following the rompings of
Kizzy and Missy Anne around the plantation. Once when
Kunta had been watching from the barn door as they rolled
a hoop across the backyard, giggling and screaming, he
had been about to go back inside when he saw Noah
standing over by Cato’s cabin, also watching. Their eyes
met, and they looked at each other for a long moment
before both turned away. Kunta wondered what had Noah
been thinking—and had the feeling that, likewise, Noah
was wondering what he was thinking. Kunta knew
somehow that they were both thinking the same things.

At ten, Noah was two years older than Kizzy, but that
difference wasn’t great enough to explain why the two
hadn’t even become friends, let alone playmates, since
they were the only slave children on the plantation. Kunta
had noticed that whenever they passed near each other,
each of them always acted as if they had not even seen the
other, and he couldn’t figure out why—unless it was
because even at their age they had begun to sense the
custom that house slaves and field slaves didn’t mix with
one another.
Whatever the reason, Noah spent his days out with
others in the fields while Kizzy swept, dusted, polished the
brass, and tidied up the massa’s bedroom every day—for
Bell to inspect later with a hickory switch in her hand. On
Saturdays, when Missy Anne usually came to call, Kizzy
would somehow miraculously manage to finish her chores
in half the time it took her every other day, and the two of
them would spend the rest of the day playing—excepting at
midday if the massa happened to be home for lunch. Then
he and Missy Anne would eat in the dining room with Kizzy
standing behind them gently fanning a leafy branch to keep
away flies, as Bell shuttled in and out serving the food and
keeping a sharp eye on both girls, having warned them
beforehand, “Y’all lemme catch you even thinkin’ ’bout
gigglin’ in dere wid massa, I’ll tan both yo’ hides!”
Kunta by now was pretty much resigned to sharing his
Kizzy with Massa Waller, Bell, and Missy Anne. He tried not
to think about what they must have her doing up there in the
big house, and he spent as much time as possible in the
barn when Missy Anne was around. But it was all he could
do to wait until each Sunday afternoon, when church would
be over and Missy Anne would go back home with her
parents. Later on these afternoons, usually Massa Waller
would be either resting or passing the time with company in
the parlor, Bell would be off with Aunt Sukey and Sister
Mandy at their weekly “Jesus meetin’s”—and Kunta would
be free to spend another couple of treasured hours alone
with his daughter.
When the weather was good, they’d go walking—usually

along the vine-covered fencerow where he had gone
almost nine years before to think of the name “Kizzy” for his
new girlchild. Out beyond where anyone would be likely to
see them, Kunta would clasp Kizzy’s soft little hand in his
own as, feeling no need to speak, they would stroll down to
a little stream, and sitting closer together beneath a shade
tree they would eat whatever Kizzy had brought along from
the kitchen—usually cold buttered biscuits filled with his
favorite blackberry preserves. Then they would begin
talking.
Mostly he’d talk and she’d interrupt him constantly with
questions, most of which would begin, “How come...” But
one day Kunta didn’t get to open his mouth before she
piped up eagerly, “You wanna hear what Missy Anne
learned me yestiddy?”
He didn’t care to hear of anything having to do with that
giggling white creature, but not wishing to hurt his Kizzy’s
feelings, he said, “I’m listenin’.”
“Peter, Peter, punkin eater,” she recited, “had a wife an’
couldn’ keep ’er, put ’er in a punkin shell, dere he kep’ ’er
very well....”
“Dat it?” he asked.
She nodded. “You like it?”
He thought it was just what he would have expected from
Missy Anne: completely asinine. “You says it real good,” he
hedged.
“Bet you can’t say it good as me,” she said with a twinkle.
“Ain’t tryin’ to!”
“Come on, Pappy, say it fo’ me jes’ once.”
“Git ’way from me wid dat mess!” He sounded more
exasperated than he really was. But she kept insisting and
finally, feeling a bit foolish that his Kizzy was able to twine
him around her finger so easily, he made a stumbling effort
to repeat the ridiculous lines—just to make her leave him
alone, he told himself.
Before she could urge him to try the rhyme again, the
thought flashed to Kunta of reciting something else to her—
perhaps a few verses from the Koran, so that she might
know how beautiful they could sound—then he realized

such verses would make no more sense to her than “Peter,
Peter” had to him. So he decided to tell her a story. She
had already heard about the crocodile and the little boy, so
he tried the one about the lazy turtle who talked the stupid
leopard into giving him a ride by pleading that he was too
sick to walk.
“Where you hears all dem stories you tells?” Kizzy asked
when he was through.
“Heared ’em when I was yo’ age—from a wise ol’
gran’mammy name Nyo Boto.” Suddenly Kunta laughed
with delight, remembering. “She was bald-headed as a
egg! Didn’t have no teeth, neither, but dat sharp tongue o’
her’n sho’ made up fer it! Loved us young’uns like her own,
though.”
“She ain’t had none of ’er own?”
“Had two when she was real young, long time fo’ she
come to Juffure. But they got took away in a fight ’tween her
village an’’nother tribe. Reckon she never got over it.”
Kunta fell silent, stunned with a thought that had never
occurred to him before: The same thing had happened to
Bell when she was young. He wished he could tell Kizzy
about her two half sisters, but he knew it would only upset
her—not to mention Bell, who hadn’t spoken of it since she
told him of her lost daughters on the night of Kizzy’s birth.
But hadn’t he—hadn’t all of those who had been chained
beside him on the slave ship been torn away from their own
mothers? Hadn’t all the countless other thousands who had
come before—and since?
“Dey brung us here naked!” he heard himself blurting.
Kizzy jerked up her head, staring; but he couldn’t stop.
“Even took our names away. Dem like you gits borned here
don’t even know who dey is! But you jes’ much Kinte as I is!
Don’t never fo’git dat! Us’ns fo’fathers was traders,
travelers, holy men—all de way back hunnuds o’ rains into
dat lan’ call Ol’ Mali! You unnerstan’ what I’m talkin’ ’bout,
chile?”
“Yes, Pappy,” she said obediently, but he knew she
didn’t. He had an idea. Picking up a stick, smoothing a
place in the dirt between them, he scratched some

characters in Arabic.
“Dat my name—Kun-ta Kin-te,” he said, tracing the
characters slowly with his finger.
She stared, fascinated. “Pappy, now do my name.” He
did. She laughed. “Dat say Kizzy?” He nodded. “Would you
learn me to write like you does?” Kizzy asked.
“Wouldn’t be fittin’,” said Kunta sternly.
“Why not?” She sounded hurt.
“In Africa, only boys learns how to read an’ write. Girls
ain’t got no use fer it—over here, neither.”
“How come mammy can read an’ write, den?”
Sternly, he said, “Don’t you be talkin’ dat! You hear me?
Ain’t nobody’s business! White folks don’ like none us doin’
no readin’ or writin’!”
“How come?”
“’Cause dey figgers less we knows, less trouble we
makes.”
“I wouldn’t make no trouble,” she said, pouting.
“If’n we don’ hurry up an’ git back to de cabin, yo’ mammy
gon’ make trouble fo’ us both.”
Kunta got up and started walking, then stopped and
turned, realizing that Kizzy was not behind him. She was
still by the bank of the stream, gazing at a pebble she had
seen.
“Come on now, it’s time to go.” She looked up at him,
and he walked over and reached out his hand. “Tell you
what,” he said. “You pick up dat pebble an’ bring it ’long an’
hide it somewheres safe, an’ if’n you keeps yo’ mouth shet
’bout it, nex’ new moon mornin’ I let you drop it in my gourd.”
“Oh, Pappy!” She was beaming.

CHAPTER 77
It was almost time for Kizzy to drop another pebble into
Kunta’s gourd—about a year later, in the summer of 1800
—when the massa told Bell he was going to
Fredericksburg for about a week on business, and it was
arranged that his brother would be coming over “to look
after things” while he was away. When Kunta heard the
news, he was even more upset than the rest of slave row,
for he hated leaving Bell and Kizzy exposed to his former
owner even more than he disliked having to be away from
them for so long. Of course, he said nothing about these
concerns, but on the morning of departure, as he left the
cabin to hitch up the horses, he was taken aback that it
seemed almost as if Bell had read his mind. She said,
“Massa John sho’ ain’t like his brother, but I knows how to
deal wid his kin’. An’ it ain’t but a week. So don’t you worry
none. We be fine.”
“I ain’t worryin’,” said Kunta, hoping she couldn’t tell he
was lying.
Kneeling to kiss Kizzy, he whispered in her ear, “Don’t
forgit dat new moon pebble, now,” and she winked
conspiratorially as Bell pretended not to have heard,
although she had known what they were doing for almost
nine months now.
For the next two days of the massa’s absence,
everything went on pretty much as usual, although Bell was
mildly annoyed at nearly everything Massa John said or did.
She particularly disliked how he sat up late in the study at
night, drinking his brother’s best whiskey from the bottle,
smoking his own big black, smelly cigars and flicking the
ashes on the carpet. Still, Massa John didn’t interfere too
much with Bell’s normal routine, and he stayed mostly to
himself.
But the midmorning of the third day, Bell was out
sweeping off the front porch when a white man on a
lathered horse came galloping up and leaped off,

demanding to see the massa.
Ten minutes later, the man left as hurriedly as he had
come. Massa John barked down the hallway for Bell to
come into the study. He looked deeply shaken, and it
flashed in Bell’s mind that something terrible had happened
to Kunta and the massa. She was sure of it when he
brusquely ordered her to assemble all the slaves in the
backyard. They all gathered, standing in a line, tense with
fear, as he flung open the back screen door and stalked out
toward them; he had a revolver conspicuous in his belt.
Coldly scanning their faces, he said, “I just got word of
some Richmond niggers’ plot to kidnap the governor,
massacre the Richmond white people, and burn the city.”
The slaves gawked at one another in astonishment as he
went on. “Thanks to God—an’ a few smart niggers who
found out and told their massas just in time—the plot’s
been crushed, and most of the niggers that started it
already caught. Armed patrols are on the roads lookin’ for
the rest, an’ I’m gonna make sure none of ’em decides to
stop off here for the night. ’Case any o’ you got uprising
notions, I’m gonna be patrollin’ day and night. None of
you’re to set foot off this property! I don’t want no gatherin’
of any kind; an’ nobody outside their own cabin after dark!”
Patting his revolver, he said, “I’m not as patient an’ soft with
niggers as my brother! Any of you even looks like you’re
thinkin’ about steppin’ outa line, his doctorin’ won’t patch up
a bullet ’tween your eyes. Now git!”
Massa John was as good as his word. For the next two
days, he enraged Bell by insisting upon watching Kizzy
taste his food before he’d eat it. He roamed the fields on
horseback during the day and sat on the porch at night with
a shotgun across his lap—his vigilance so absolute that the
slave-row people dared not try even discussing the
uprising, let alone plan one of their own. After receiving and
reading the next issue of the Gazette, Massa John burned it
in the fireplace, and when a neighboring massa visited one
afternoon, he ordered Bell to leave the house and they
huddled talking in the study with the windows shut. So it
was impossible for anyone even to find out more about the

plot, or especially about its aftermath, which was what had
Bell and the others worried sick—not about Kunta, since
he’d be safe with the massa, but about the fiddler, who had
left on the day before they had to play at a big society ball in
Richmond. The slave-row people could only imagine what
might be happening to black strangers in Richmond at the
hands of enraged, panic-stricken whites.
The fiddler still hadn’t returned when Kunta and the
massa did—three days early—their trip cut short by the
uprising. Upon Massa John’s departure later that day, the
restrictions he’d imposed were relaxed somewhat,
although not completely, and the massa was very cold
toward everyone. It wasn’t until Kunta and Bell were alone in
their cabin that he could tell her of what he’d overheard in
Fredericksburg: that the black revolters already captured
had been tortured into helping the authorities round up
others involved, and some had confessed that the revolt
had been planned by a free blacksmith named Gabriel
Prosser, who had recruited around two hundred handpicked black men—butlers, gardeners, janitors, waiters,
ironworkers, rope makers, coal miners, boatmen, even
preachers—and trained them for more than a year. Prosser
was still at large, and the militia was combing the
countryside for suspects, said Kunta, poor-white
“paterollers” were terrorizing the roads; and there were
rumors about some massas beating slaves, some to death,
for little or no provocation.
“Look like our only hope is we’s all dey got,” said Bell. “If
’n dey kills us off, dey won’t have no slaves no mo’.”
“Fiddler back?” asked Kunta, ashamed that he’d been
so engrossed in telling what had happened that he hadn’t
thought of his friend until now.
Bell shook her head. “We all been mighty worried. But
dat fiddler a crafty nigger. He get home awright.”
Kunta didn’t fully agree. “He ain’t home yet.”
When the fiddler didn’t return the next day, the massa
wrote a message notifying the sheriff, and told Kunta to
deliver it to the county seat. Kunta had done so—seeing the
sheriff read the message and silently shake his head. Then

returning homeward, Kunta had driven slowly for three or
four miles, staring gloomily at the road ahead, wondering if
he’d ever see the fiddler again, feeling badly that he had
never actually expressed that he considered him a good
friend—despite his drinking, his cussing, and other
shortcomings—when he heard a poor imitation of a white
“cracker” drawl, “Hey, nigger!”
Kunta thought he must be hearing things. “Where de hell
you think you goin’?” the voice came again, and reining the
horses, Kunta looked around and along both sides of the
road, but saw nobody. Then, suddenly, “You ain’t got no
travel pass, boy, you in a heap o’ trouble”—and there,
climbing from a ditch, ragged and torn, cut and bruised,
covered with mud while carrying his battered case and
grinning from ear to ear, was the fiddler.
Kunta let out a shout, jumping down from his seat, and
within seconds he and the fiddler were hugging and whirling
each other around, laughing.
“You de spittin’ image of a African I knows,” exclaimed
the fiddler, “but couldn’t be him—he wouldn’t never let
nobody know he glad to see ’em.”
“Don’ know why I is,” said Kunta, embarrassed at
himself.
“Fine welcome fo’ a friend what crawled on his han’s an’
knees all de way back from Richmon’ jes’ to see yo’ ugly
face again.”
Kunta’s seriousness conveyed the degree of his
concern. “Was it bad, Fiddler?”
“Bad ain’t even close to it. Thought sho’ I’d be playin’ a
duet wid angels fo’ I got out’n dere!” As Kunta took the
muddy fiddle case and they both clambered into the wagon,
the fiddler continued talking, nonstop. “Richmon’ white folks
jes’ ’bout crazy scared. Militiamens ever’where stoppin’
niggers, an’ dem widout a travel pass next stop in jail wid a
headache. An’ dem de lucky ones. Packs o’ po’ crackers
roamin’ de streets like wil’ dogs, jumpin’ on niggers, beatin’
some so bad can’t hardly tell who dey was.
“De ball I’se playin’ at break up halfway through when dey
gits firs’ word ’bout de uprisin’, missies screamin’ an’

runnin’ roun’ in circles, massas pullid’ guns on us niggers
up on de bad’stan’. ’Midst all de ruckus, I slips into de
kitchen an’ hid in a garbage can till eve’ybody gone. Den I
climbs out a window and took to de back streets, stayin’
way from lights. I’d got to de edge o’ town when all of a
sudden I hears dis shoutin’ behin’ me, den a whole lotta
feets runnin’ same way I is. Sump’n tell me dey ain’t black,
but I ain’t waitin’ to fin’ out. I cuts ’roun’ de nex’ corner flyin’
low, but I hears’em gainin’ on me, an’ I’se ’bout to say my
prayers when I sees a real low porch dat I rolls right under.
“It’s real tight under dere, an’ I’se inchin’ further back jes’
when dem crackers goes runnin’ by wid torches shoutin’
‘Git dat nigger!’ I bumps ’gainst sump’n big an’ sof’, an’ a
hand clap over my mouf, an’ a nigger voice say, ‘Nex’ time,
knock!’ Turns out it’s a warehouse nightwatchman seen a
mob tear a frien’ o’ his apart, an’ he ain’t got no ’tention o’
comin’ out from under dat porch ’til nex’ spring, if’n it take
dat long to blow over.
“Well, after a while I wishes ’im luck, an’ heads out again
an’ makes it to de woods. Dat was five days ago. Would a
made it here in fo’, but so many paterollers on de roads, I
had to keep to de woods, eatin’ berries, sleepin’ in de
thickets wid de rabbits. Did all right ’til yestiddy a few miles
east o’ here, bunch o’ real mean crackers cotched me in de
open.
“Day’s jes’ spoilin’ to whup deyselves a nigger, maybe
even string’im up—dey had a rope right dere wid ’em!
Dey’s shovin’ me back an’ fo’th, axin’ whose nigger I is an’
where I think I’se goin’, but not payin’ no ’tention to what I
tells ’em—’til I says I’se a fiddler. Dey hol’ on, dey thinks
I’se lym’, an’ hollers, ‘Well, le’s hear you play, den!’
“African, le’me tell you sump’n. I open up dat fiddle case
an’ you ain’t never heard no concert like I give right out dere
in de middle o’ de road. Played ‘Turkey in de Straw’—you
know po’ crackers loves dat—an’ fo’ I’m warmed up good, I
had dem all a-hootin’ an’ clappin’ an’ tappin’ dey feets, an’ I
ain’t quit ’til dey’s had dey fill an’ tell me to go ’head an’
don’t dillydally gittin’ my tail home. An’ I ain’t neither! Done
hit de ditch whenever I seen a hoss or buggy, or wagon

comin’, until dis one was you! An’ here I is!”
As they rolled into the narrow road leading to the big
house, soon they heard shouting and then saw the people
of slave row running to meet the wagon.
“Might think a body was missed ’round here”—although
the fiddler was grinning, Kunta could sense how moved the
man was, as grinning himself, he said, “Look like you gon’
have to tell de whole story all over again.”
“You ever knowed dat to stop me?” asked the fiddler.
“Leas’ways I’se here to tell it!”

CHAPTER 78
In the months that followed, with the capture, trial, and
execution of one conspirator after another, and finally of
Gabriel Prosser himself, news of the Richmond uprising—
and of the tensions it generated—gradually subsided, and
once more politics became the chief discussion topic
among the massa and his friends, and therefore also within
the slave row. As best Kunta, Bell, and the fiddler could
piece together what they overheard in various ways about
the voting for the next President, a Massa Aaron Burr had
run a tie with the famous Massa, Thomas Jefferson—who
finally had gotten the job, apparently since he was
supported by the powerful Massa Alexander Hamilton; and
Massa Burr, an archenemy of Massa Hamilton, had been
made Vice President.
No one seemed to know much about Massa Burr, but
Kunta learned from a buggy driver who had been born in
Virginia not far from Massa Jefferson’s Monticello
plantation that his slaves declared there couldn’t be a better
massa.
“Dat driver tol’ me Massa Jefferson ain’t never ’lowed his
oberseers to whup nobody,” Kunta shared with the slaverow people. “An’ dey all eats good, an’ he let de womens
spin an’ sew ’em all good clothes, an’ he b’lieve in lettin’
’em learn different trades.” After Massa Jefferson returned
home from one long trip, Kunta had heard, his slaves had
met him two miles from the plantation, unhitched the
horses, and gleefully pulled the carriage that long distance
to the Monticello big house, where they carried him on their
shoulders to the doorstep.
The fiddler snorted. “Pret’ near eve’ybody know plenty
dem niggers Massa Jefferson’s own chilluns by high-yaller
woman he own, name o’ Sally Hemings.” He was about to
say more when Bell contributed the most interesting thing
she knew. “’Cordin’ to a kitchen maid he use to have dere,”
she said, “ain’t nothin’ Massa Jefferson ruther eat dan a

rabbit soaked all night in oil, thyme, rosemary, an’ garlic,
den next day simmered down in wine till de meat fallin’ off
de bones.”
“You don’ say!” exclaimed the fiddler sarcastically.
“See how soon you gits ’nother piece dat rhubarb pie you
keeps axin’ me to make!” snapped Bell.
“See how soon I axes you!” he shot back.
Refusing to get caught in the middle, as he had so often
been in the past—in trying to make peace when his wife
and the fiddler started in on each other, then turned on him
for butting in—Kunta acted as if he hadn’t heard, and
simply continued where he’d left off before they interrupted.
“I heared Massa Jefferson say slavery jes’ bad for white
folks as for us’ns, an’ he ’gree wid Massa Hamilton it’s jes’
too much nachel diffrence fo’ white an’ black folks ever to
learn to live wid one’nother peaceful. Dey say Massa
Jefferson want to see us sot free, but not stickin’ roun’ dis
country takin’ po’ white folks’ jobs—he favor shippin’ us
back to Africa, gradual, widout big fuss an’ mess.”
“Massa Jefferson better talk to dem slave traders,” said
the fiddler, “’cause look like dey got diffrent ideas which
way de ships oughta go.”
“Seem like lately when massa go to other plantations, I
hears’bout lots of peoples gittin’ sol’,” said Kunta. “Whole
families dat’s been all dey lives roun’ here is gittin’ sol’ off
down South by dey massas. Even passed one dem slave
traders yestiddy on de road. He wave an’ grin an’ tip ’is hat,
but massa ack like he ain’t even seed ’im.”
“Humph! Dem slave traders gittin’ thick as flies in de
towns,” said the fiddler. “Las’ time I went to Fredericksburg,
dey was buzzin’ after sump’n ol’ an’ dried-up as me, ’til I
flash my pass. I seed a po’ ol’ graybeard nigger git sol’ off
fo’ six hunnud dollars. Young healthy buck use to fetch dat.
But dat ol’ nigger sho’ didn’t go quiet! Dey’s jerkin’ ’im off’n
de auction block, an’ he bawlin’ out, ‘Y’all white folks done
made Gawd’s earth a livin’ HELL fo’ my peoples! But jes’
sho’ as JEDGMENT MAWNIN’ gwie come, y’all’s hell
gwine bounce BACK on y’all dat brung it! Ain’t no BEGGIN’
gwine stop it from ’STROYIN’ you! No MEDICINES y’all

make ... no RUNNIN’ y’all do ... none y’all’s GUNS ... no
PRAYIN’, no NOTHIN’ he’p y’all den!’ By dat time dey’d
drug ’im off. Ol’ nigger soun’ like a preacher or sump’n, de
way he carry on.”
Kunta saw Bell’s sudden agitation. “Dat ol’ man—” she
asked, “he real black an’ skinny, kin’ o’ stooped over an’
got a white beard an’ had a big scar down his neck?”
The fiddler looked startled. “Yeah! Sho’ was! Sho’ did. All
dem things—you know who he was?”
Bell looked at Kunta as if she were ready to weep. “Dat
de preacher what christened Kizzy,” she said somberly.
Kunta was visiting in the fiddler’s cabin late the next day
when Cato knocked at the open door. “What you doin’ out
dere? Come on in!” the fiddler shouted.
Cato did. Both Kunta and the fiddler were very glad that
he had come. Only recently they had expressed mutual
wishing that the quiet, solid lead field hand Cato was closer
to them, as the old gardener had been.
Cato seemed ill at ease. “Jes’ want to say I b’lieves it be
good if y’all maybe don’ tell de scaries’ things y’all hears
’bout so many folks gittin’ sol’ off down South—” Cato
hesitated. “Reason why I’m tellin’ y’all de truth, out in de
fields de folks is gittin’ so scairt dey gwine git sol’, dey jes’
can’ hardly keep dey minds on no workin’.” Again he
paused briefly. “Leas’ways nobody ’ceptin’ me an’ dat boy
Noah. I figgers if I gits sol’, well, I’se jes’ sol’, ain’t much I
can do’bout it. An’ dat Noah—don’ seem like he scairt o’
nothin’.”
After several minutes of talk among the three of them—
during which Kunta sensed Cato’s warm response to their
warm welcoming of his visit—they agreed that it would
probably be best if only they, not even Bell, shared the news
that was the most frightening, that could only alarm the
others needlessly.
But one night in the cabin a week or so later, Bell looked
up abruptly from her knitting and said, “Seem like de cat
got some tongues roun’ here—either dat or white folks
done quit sellin’ niggers, an’ I knows I got mo’ sense dan
dat!”

Grunting in embarrassment, Kunta was amazed that she
—and probably all the other people on slave row—had
guessed intuitively that he and the fiddler weren’t telling
them all they knew anymore. So he began reporting slave
sale stories again—omitting the most unpleasant details.
But he stressed news about successful runaways, featuring
the black grapevine tales he had heard about wily, fasttalking slaves in the act of escaping and making fools of
ignorant poor cracker “paterollers.” One night he told them
of a high-yaller butler and a black stablehand having stolen
a buggy, horse, and fine clothing and a hat that the high
yaller wore while he pretended to be a rich massa loudly
cursing his black buggy driver whenever he drew within
earshot of any white patrols they met along their rapid
buggy ride into the North and automatic freedom. Another
time Kunta told of a no less audacious slave who always
galloped his mule almost into the “paterollers’” faces before
halting and unrolling with a flourish a large, fine-print
document that he said would explain his urgent errand for
his massa—gambling always correctly that the illiterate
white crackers would wave him on rather than admit they
couldn’t read. Kunta often now set the slave-row people to
laughing—telling such as how other escaping blacks had
so perfected an act of chronic stuttering that disgusted
“paterollers” told them to get along their way rather than
spend obvious hours trying to question them. He told of
runaways’ affected fearful reluctance before finally
apologetically confiding how much their rich, powerful
massas despised poor whites and how harshly they dealt
with any interference with their servants. One night Kunta
set slave row to roaring about a house slave he’d been told
of who reached safety up North just a jump ahead of his
hotly pursuing massa, who quickly summoned a policeman.
“You know you my nigger!” the massa screamed wildly at
his slave, who simply looked blank and kept exclaiming,
“He’p me Gawd, I ain’t never sot eyes on dat white man!”—
convincing a gathered crowd, along with the policeman who
ordered the furious white man to quiet down and move on
or he’d have to arrest him for disturbing the peace.

For years now Kunta had managed to avoid going
anywhere near any slave auction, ever since the one where
the girl had futilely cried out to him for help. But a few
months after his talk with Cato and the fiddler, one early
afternoon Kunta drove the massa into the public square of
the county seat just as a slave sale was beginning.
“Oyez, oyez, gentlemen of Spotsylvania, I offer the finest
lot of niggers ever seen in y’all’s lives!” As the auctioneer
shouted to the crowd, his beefy, younger assistant jerked
an old slave woman up onto the platform. “A fine cook!” he
began—but she began screaming, gesturing frantically to a
white man in the crowd: “Massa Philip! Philip! you act like
you done forgot I worked fo’ you an’ yo’ brudders’ daddy
when y’all was jes’ young’uns! Knows I’se ol’ an’ ain’t much
now, but please, Lawd, keep me! I work for you hard,
Massa Philip! Please, suh, don’ let ’em whup me to death
somewheres down South!”
“Stop the buggy, Toby!” the massa ordered.
Kunta’s blood ran cold as he reined the horses to a halt.
Why after all these years of showing no interest in slave
auctions did Massa Waller want to watch one? Was he
thinking of buying someone, or what? Was it the pitiful
woman’s heartbreaking outburst? Whomever she had
appealed to yelled back some ridicule, and the crowd was
still laughing when a trader bought her for seven hundred
dollars.
“He’p me, Gawd, Jesus, Lawd, he’p me!” she cried as
the trader’s black helper began shoving her roughly toward
the slave pen. “Git yo’ black hands off’n me, nigger!” she
screamed, and the crowd rocked with laughter. Kunta bit
his lip, blinking back tears.
“Prize buck o’ the lot, gentlemen!” Next on the platform
was a young black man, glaring baleful hatred, his barrel
chest and thickly muscled body crisscrossed with the angry,
reddish welts of a very recent, severe lashing. “This one jes’
needed some remindin’! He’ll heal up quick! He can plow a
mule into the ground! Pick you four hundred pounds of
cotton any day! Look at ’im! A natural stud—if your
wenches ain’t bearin’ every year like they ought! A steal at

any price!” The chained young man brought fourteen
hundred dollars.
Kunta’s vision blurred anew as a weeping mulatto
woman great with child was led onto the platform. “Two for
the price of one, or one for free, dependin’ on how you look
at it!” shouted the auctioneer. “Pickaninnies today worth a
hundred dollars soon’s they draw breath!” She brought a
thousand dollars.
It was becoming unendurable when the next one came,
being pulled along by her chain—and Kunta nearly fell from
his seat. The teen-aged black girl, quaking with terror, in
her build, her skin color, even her facial features, might
have been an older Kizzy! As if Kunta had been poleaxed,
he heard the auctioneer start his spiel: “A fine trained
housemaid—or she’s prime breedin’ stock if you want
one!” he added with a leering wink. Inviting closer
inspection, he abruptly loosened the neckpiece of the girl’s
sack dress, which fell about her feet as she screamed,
weeping, flinging her arms downward in an effort to cover
her nakedness from the ogling crowd, several of whom
jostled forward, reaching out to poke and fondle her.
“That’s enough! Let’s get out of here!” the massa
commanded—an instant before Kunta felt he would have
done it anyway.
Kunta hardly saw the road before them as they rode back
toward the plantation; his mind was reeling. What if the girl
had really been his Kizzy? What if the cook had been his
Bell? What if they both were sold away from him? Or he
from them? It was too horrible to think about—but he could
think of nothing else.
Even before the buggy reached the big house, Kunta
intuitively sensed that something was wrong, perhaps
because it was a warm summer evening, yet he saw none
of the slave-row people strolling or sitting around outside.
Dropping the massa off, Kunta hurriedly unhitched and
stabled the horses, then headed straight for the kitchen,
where he knew Bell now would be preparing the massa’s
supper. She didn’t hear him until he asked through the
screen door, “You awright?”

“Oh, Kunta!” Whirling around, her eyes wide with shock,
loudly she blurted, “Slave trader done been here!” Then,
lowering her voice, “I heared Cato’s whippoorwill whistle
from out in de fiel’ an’ run to de front window. Minute I seed
dat citified-lookin’ white man gittin’ off his hoss, I jes’ smelt
what he was! Lawd a mercy! I open de do’ by time he got
up de steps. He ax to see my massa or missis. I say my
missis in de graveyard, an my massa a doctor off tendin’
sick peoples, an’ no tellin’ what time o’ night he git back.
Den he throw me dis smirkin’ look an’ han’ me a l’il card
wid printin’ on it an’ say give dat to massa an’ tell ’im he be
back. Well, I’se feared not to give massa de card—finally
jes’ stuck it on his desk.”
“Bell!” a call came from the living room.
She nearly dropped her spoon. She whispered, “Wait! I
be back!” Kunta waited—hardly daring to breathe,
expecting the worst—until he saw the returning Bell’s
expression of immense relief.
“He say he want early supper! De card gone from de
desk where I lef’ it, but he don’ say nothin’ ’bout it, an’ fo’
sho’ I ain’t neither!”
After supper, Bell filled in the field hands on the
developments after Cato’s warning whistle, and Aunt Sukey
started crying. “Lawd, y’all think massa gwine sell some
us?”
“Ain’t nobody never gon’ beat me no mo’!” declared
Cato’s big wife, Beulah.
A long, heavy silence fell. Kunta could think of nothing to
say; but he knew he wasn’t going to tell them about the
auction.
“Well,” said the fiddler finally, “massa ain’t one o’ dem
wid a whole lotta spare niggers. An he is one dem got
plenty money, so ain’t needin’ to sell no niggers to pay
debts, like a whole lot doin’.”
Kunta hoped the others found the fiddler’s comforting
effort more convincing than he did. Bell looked a little
hopeful. “I knows massa, or anyhow, I thinks I does. Long
as we’s all been here, he ain’t never sol’ off nobody—
leas’ways nobody ’cept dat buggy driver Luther, an’ dat

’cause Luther drawed dat map to he’p a gal try to ’scape.”
Bell hesitated before continuing. “Naw!” she said. “Massa
wouldn’t git rid o’ none us widout no good cause—any y’all
speck he would?” But nobody answered.

CHAPTER 79
Kunta’s ears were riveted upon the massa’s dialogue with
a favorite one of his cousins, who was being brought home
for dinner, as they sat in the rear of the rolling buggy.
“At a county seat auction the other day,” the massa was
saying, “I was astonished that everyday field hands are
selling for twice to three times what they fetched just a few
years ago. And from advertisements I read in the Gazette,
carpenters, brickmasons, blacksmiths—in fact, slaves who
are really experienced in about any trade, leatherworkers,
sailmakers, musicians, whatever, are going for as much as
twenty-five hundred dollars apiece.”
“It’s the same everywhere since this new cotton gin!”
exclaimed the massa’s cousin. “More than a million slaves
already in the country, I’ve been told, yet the ships still can’t
seem to bring enough new ones to supply those Deep
South bottomlands trying to meet the demands of the
northern mills.”
“What’s concerning me is that too many otherwise
sensible planters, in their eagerness for quick profits, may
be starting to see our state of Virginia eventually losing its
best quality of slaves, even the best breeding stock,” said
Massa Waller, “and that’s just plain foolishness!”
“Foolishness? Hasn’t Virginia got more slaves than she
needs? They cost more to maintain than most are worth in
work.”
“Maybe today,” said the massa, “but how do we know our
needs five, ten years from today? Who would have
predicted such a cotton boom as this ten years ago? And
I’ve never gone along with your very popular talk of slaves
keep costing so much. It seems to me on any place that’s
just halfway well organized, don’t they plant, raise, and
harvest what they eat? And they’re usually prolific—every
pickaninny that’s born is worth money to you, too. A lot are
fully capable of learning skills to make them even more
valuable. I’m convinced that slaves and land, in that order,

are a man’s best investments today. I’d never sell either of
mine for the same reason—they’re the backbone of our
system.”
“The system may be starting to change without many
realizing it,” said the massa’s cousin. “Look at these upstart
rednecks strutting around as if they’ve entered the planter
class just because they’ve bought one or two broken-down
slaves to finish working them to death at building up their
pitiful little crops of cotton and tobacco. They’re beyond
contempt, but rednecks seemed to breed even faster than
niggers. Just in sheer numbers they may begin to encroach
on our land before long as well as on our labor.”
“Well, I don’t think we have much to worry about”—the
massa chuckled, seemingly amused at his thought—“not as
long as poor whites are competing with free blacks to buy
the cast-off slaves.”
His cousin joined him in laughter. “Yes, isn’t it
unbelievable? I hear that half the free niggers in the cities
work day and night to save enough money to buy their
kinfolk, and then set them free.”
“It’s why we have so many free blacks in the South,” said
the massa.
“I think we’re permitting too many of them in Virginia,”
said his cousin. “It’s not just how they’re sapping our labor
supply by buying up their kin and creating more free blacks
They’re also at the root of most uprisings. We don’t ever
want to forget that blacksmith in Richmond.”
“True!” said Massa Waller. “But I still think that with
enough good, strict laws to keep them in their places, and
proper examples made of troublemakers, then most of
them can serve useful purposes—in the cities. I’m told that
right now, they just about dominate in most of the trades.”
“In the traveling I do, I’ve seen myself how widespread
that is,” said his cousin. “They’re warehouse and waterfront
workers, merchants, undertakers, gardeners. They’re the
best cooks, also musicians, of course! And I’ve heard
there’s not even one white barber in the whole city of
Lynchburg. I’d have to grow a beard! I’d never let one of
them near my throat with a razor!”

They both laughed. But then the massa grew serious. “I
think the cities may be spawning for us a bigger social
problem than free blacks—I mean these slick-tongued conman slave traders. I hear most are former tavern owners,
speculators, jackleg teachers, lawyers, preachers, and the
like. Three or four have approached me in the county seat
offering sight-unseen prices for my slaves, and one even
had the nerve to leave his card here at the house! Far as
I’m concerned, they’re totally vultures without scruples.”
They had arrived at Massa Waller’s house, and Kunta—
seeming as if he hadn’t heard a word they’d said—jumped
down to help them out. By the time they’d gone inside,
washed up after the dusty ride, then settled in the drawing
room and called Bell to bring them drinks, she and
everyone else on the plantation knew from Kunta the vital
fact that the massa had no plans to sell them. And not long
after supper, Kunta repeated to his rapt slave-row audience
the entire conversation, as best he could duplicate it.
There was silence for a moment. Then Sister Mandy
spoke. “Massa an his cousin talkin’ ’bout free niggers
savin’ up to buy kinfolks free. I wants to know how dem free
niggers got deyselves free!”
“Well,” said the fiddler, “whole lotta city slaves’ massas
lets ’em learn trades, den hires ’em out fo’ pay an’ gives
’em some de money, like massa do wid me. So wid ten,
fi’teen years o’ savin’, if’n he real lucky, a hire-out nigger
can maybe give his massa de money to buy hisself free.”
“Dat why you keeps so busy fiddlin’?”’ asked Cato.
“Ain’t doin’ it ’cause I loves to see white folks dance,”
said the fiddler.
“You got ’nough to buy yo’self yet?”
“If I did, I wouldn’ be here fo’ you to ax dat question.”
Everyone laughed.
“Is you close, anyways?” Cato persisted.
“Don’ give up, does you?” said the fiddler, exasperated.
“I’se closer’n I was las’ week, but not close I’se gwine be
nex’ week.”
“Awright, but when you gits it, what you gwine do?”
“Split de win’ brudder! Headin’ Nawth! Hear some dem

northern free niggers livin’ better’n plenty white folks, an’ dat
soun’ good to me. Speck I move in nex’ door to one dem
high-tone mulattoes an start talkin high-toned an’ dressin’
up in silk like dey does, an’ start to playin’ de harp an’
gwine to meetin’s to ’scuss books an raisin’ flowers an’
sich as dat.”
When the laughter lessened, Aunt Sukey asked, “What
y’all think ’bout what white folks always says dat dem
mulattoes an’ high yallers do so good cause de whole lot o’
white blood dey got in ’em make ’em smarter’n we is?”
“Well, white mens sho’ mixes roun’ ’nough dey blood!”
Bell said noncommittally.
“Watch yo’ talk bout my mammy’s oberseer!” the fiddler
exclaimed, trying to look insulted. Cato almost fell off his
chair laughing till Beulah gave his head a whack with the
back of her hand.
“Git serious here!” the fiddler went on. “Aunt Sukey ax a
question I ’tends to answer! If you jedgin’ by sich as me,
den you know light-skinned niggers got to be smart! Or take
dat brown-skin Benjamin Banneker what white folks calls a
genius wid figgers, even studyin’ de stars an’ moon—but
whole heap o’ smart niggers black like y’all, too!”
Bell said, “I done heared massa talk ’bout a James
Derham nigger doctor in New Orleans. White doctor what
teached ’im claim he know more’n he do, an’ he black as
dey gits, too.”
“Tell you anudder one,” said the fiddler. “Dat Prince Hall
what started dat nigger Masonic Order! I seen pictures
some dem big preachers what started dem nigger
churches, most of’em so black you couldn’t hardly see ’em
less’n dey eyes was open. An’ what bout dat Phyllis
Wheatley what writes dem pomes white folks say so fine,
an dat Gustavus Vassa what writes books?” The fiddler
glanced in Kunta’s direction. “Dey’s both straight-fromAfrica niggers, not nary drop o’ white folks’ blood, an’ dey
sho’ don’t soun’ all dat dumb to me!” Then laughing, the
fiddler said, “’Cose, dey’s always dumb black niggers—
take Cato here ...” He sprang up and ran with Cato two
steps behind. “Cotch you, I’ll dumb you upside de head!”

Cato shouted.
When the others stopped guffawing, Kunta spoke.
“Laugh all y’all want. All niggers de same to white folks.
One drop o’ nigger blood means nigger if you’s even
whiter’n dem—an I’se seed plenty dat is.”
It was about a month later when the fiddler returned from
one of his trips bearing news that he had seen elating
whites everywhere he’d been—and that plunged slave row
into gloom: The French leader named Napoleon had sent
across the big water a huge army which, after much fighting
and bloodshed, had taken Haiti back from the blacks and
their liberator, General Toussaint. Invited to dinner by the
victorious French army’s general, Toussaint had made the
mistake of accepting; during the meal, the waiters seized
and trussed him, and rushed him onto a ship bound for
France, where he had been taken in chains before
Napoleon, who had plotted the entire treachery.
Being the black General Toussaint’s greatest admirer on
the plantation, Kunta took the news harder than anyone
else. He was still sitting dejectedly in the fiddler’s cabin
when the last of the others trudged silently out.
“I knows how you felt ’bout dat Toussaint,” said the
fiddler, “an’ I don’ want you to think I takes it light, but I got a
piece o’ news I jes’ cain’t hol’ in another minute!”
Kunta glanced grimly at the fiddler, further offended that
he looked ready to pop open with happiness. What news
could be so good as to affect anyone’s proper respect for
the humiliation of the greatest black leader of all time?
“I done it!” The fiddler was a study of excitement. “I didn’t
say nothin’ jes’ a month back when Cato axed how much I
had saved up, but den I was jes’ a few dollars short—an
now I jes’ done made it wid dis trip! Took me playin’ over
nine hunnud times fo’ white folks to dance, an I sho’ di’n’t
know if I’d ever make it, so I di’n’t talk ’bout it wid nobody—
not even you—’til I done it! African, I got dat seven hunnud
dollars what massa long time ago tol’ me I’d have to earn to
buy myself free!”
Kunta was too thunderstruck to speak.
“Looka here!” said the fiddler, ripping open his mattress

and dumping the contents out onto the floor; hundreds of
dollar bills eddied about their feet. “An’ looka here!” he
said, dragging a gunny sack out from under the bed and
emptying it, clinking, on top of the bills—hundreds of coins
of every denomination.
“Well, African, you gwine say sump’n, or jes’ stan’ dere
wid yo’ mouf’ open?”
“Don’t know what to say,” said Kunta.
“How ’bout ’gratulations?”
“Jes’ seem too good to be true.”
“It true awright. I done counted it a thousan’ times. Even
got’nough extra to buy me a cardboard suitcase!”
Kunta just couldn’t believe it. The fiddler was really going
to be free! It wasn’t just a dream. Kunta felt like laughing
and crying—for himself as much as for his friend.
The fiddler knelt and began scooping up the money.
“Look, you deaf’n dumb ’bout dis till tomorrow mawnin’,
awright? Dat when I goes to see massa an’ tell ’im he
seven hunnud dollars richer! You gwine be glad as he is to
see me go?”
“Glad fo’ you. Not fo’ me,” said Kunta.
“If you tryin’ to make me feel so sorry for you, I buy you
free, too, you gwine wait a spell! Done took me thutty-three
years fiddlin’ to freedom!”
By the time Kunta got back to his own cabin, he had
begun to miss the fiddler already, and Bell mistook his
sadness for grief about Toussaint, so he didn’t have to hide
—or explain—what he was feeling.
When he went by the fiddler’s cabin the next morning
after feeding the horses, he found it empty, so he went to
ask Bell if he was in with the massa.
“He lef’ an hour ago. Ack like he seen a ghost. What de
matter wid ’im, an’ what he want wid massa anyways?”
“What he say when he come out?” asked Kunta.
“Don’ say nothin’. Tol’ you he went pas’ me like I wasn’t
dere.”
Without another word, Kunta walked out the screen door
and back toward slave row—with Bell shouting after him,
“Now where you goin’?” And when he didn’t answer: “Dat

right! Don’t tell me nothin’! I’se jes’ yo’ wife!” Kunta had
disappeared.
After asking around, knocking at every cabin door, even
peeking inside the privy and shouting “Fiddler!” in the barn,
Kunta headed down along the fencerow. When he had
gone a good way, he heard it—sad, slow strains of a song
he had heard blacks at an “O Lawd” camp meeting singing
once ... only this time it was being played on a fiddle. The
fiddler’s music was always rollicking and happy; this
sounded almost as if the fiddle were sobbing, drifting up
along the fencerow.
Quickening his stride, Kunta came within sight of an oak
tree spreading half over a brook down near the edge of
Massa Waller’s property. Approaching closer, he saw the
fiddler’s shoes extending from behind the tree. Just then,
the music stopped—and so did Kunta, feeling suddenly like
an intruder. He stood still, waiting for the fiddling to resume,
but the drone of bees and the burble of the stream were the
only sounds that broke the silence. At last, almost
sheepishly, Kunta moved around the tree and faced the
fiddler. One glance was all he needed to know what had
happened—the light was gone from his friend’s face; the
familiar sparkle in his eyes had been extinguished.
“You need some mattress stuffin’?” the fiddler’s voice
was cracking. Kunta said nothing. Tears began to drip
down along the fiddler’s cheeks; he brushed them furiously
away as if they were acid, and the words came in a rush: “I
tells ’im I finally got de money to buy me free—ev’y penny of
it. He hem an’ haw a minute; an’ look at de ceilin’. Den he
’gratulate me on savin’ up so much. But den he tell me if I
wants to, de seven hunnud could be a down
payment,’cause in doin’ business he got to consider how
de slave prices done gone way up since dat cotton gin
come in. He say now he couldn’t ’cept no less’n fifteen
hunnud at de leas’ fo’ a good money-makin’ fiddler like me,
dat he could git twenty-five hunnud fo’ if he was to sell me to
somebody else. He say he real sorry, but he hope I
understand business is business, an he have to git fair
return on his vestment.” The fiddler began openly sobbing

now. “He say bein’ free ain’t all it cracked up to be nohow,
an’ he wish me de bes’ luck in comin’ up wid de res’ if I
insists ... an’ he tell me keep up de good work ... an’ when I
go out, would I ax Bell to bring’im some coffee.”
He fell silent. Kunta just stood there.
“Dat son-of-a-bitch!” the fiddler screamed suddenly, and
flinging back his arm, he hurled his fiddle into the stream.
Kunta waded in to get it, but even before he reached
down, he could see it was broken.

CHAPTER 80
When Kunta got home with the massa well into one night a
few months later, Bell was less irritated than concerned that
they were both too tired even to eat the good supper she’d
prepared. For a strange fever had begun to strike
throughout the county, and the two men had been leaving
earlier each morning and coming back later each night in
the massa’s efforts as the county’s doctor to keep up with
the spreading contagion.
Kunta was so worn out, slumped in his rocking chair,
staring vacantly at the fire, that he didn’t even notice Bell
feeling his forehead and taking off his shoes. And half an
hour passed before he realized suddenly that Kizzy wasn’t
on his lap, as usual, showing him some new plaything she’d
made or prattling about what she’d done that day.
“Where dat chile?” he asked finally.
“Put ’er to bed an hour ago,” said Bell.
“She ain’t sick, is she?” he asked, sitting up.
“Naw, jes’ tuckered out from play. Missy Anne come over
today.” Kunta was too exhausted even to feel his customary
annoyance, but Bell changed the subject anyway. “While
Roosby waitin’ to take ’er home, he tell me he heared de
fiddler playin’ other night at a ball he took Massa John to
over in Fredericksburg. He say he didn’t hardly recognize
de fiddlin’, it jes’ don’t soun’ de same. I didn’t tell ’im de
fiddler hisself ain’t de same since he find out he ain’t free.”
“Seem like he don’t care bout nothin’ no mo’,” said
Kunta.
“Sho’ seem dat. He keep to hisself, don’t hardly even nod
to nobody no mo’, ’ceptin’ Kizzy when she bring ’im supper
an set wid’im whilst he eat it. She de onliest one he want
anythin’ to do wid. Don’t even spen’ no time wid you no
mo’.”
“What wid dis fever goin’ roun’ lately,” said Kunta wearily,
“I ain’t hardly had no time or stren’th for visitin’ noways.”
“Yeah, I been noticin’, an you ain’t gon’ set up here half

de night, you goin’ straight to bed.”
“Leave me ’lone, woman. I’m fine.”
“Naw you ain’t!” Bell said decisively, taking him by the
hand, helping him up, and leading him into the bedroom
without his further resistance. Kunta sat on the edge of the
bed while she helped him out of his clothes, then he lay
down, sighing.
“Roll over an’ I gives you a backrub.”
He obeyed, and she began kneading his back with her
stiffened fingers.
He winced.
“What’s de matter? I ain’t rubbin’ all dat hard.”
“Ain’t nothin’.”
“Do dis hurt here, too?” she asked, pressing down farther
toward the small of his back.
“Ow!”
“Don’t like de looks o’ dis,” she said, lightening her touch
to a caress.
“I’se jes’ tired. All I need’s a night’s sleep.”
“We’ll see,” she said, blowing out the candle and
climbing in beside him.
But when she had served the massa his breakfast the
next morning, Bell had to tell him that Kunta had been
unable to rise from his bed.
“Probably fever,” said the massa, trying to conceal his
irritation. “You know what to do. In the meanwhile, there’s an
epidemic going on and I’ve got to have a driver.”
“Yassa, Massa.” She thought for a moment. “You got any
objection to dat fiel’-hand boy Noah? He done growed up
so fast he bout man-size now. Handle de mules good, he
sho’ could drive yo’ hosses, too, suh.”
“How old is he now?”
“Well suh, Noah roun’ two years older’n my Kizzy, so dat
—” she paused to count on her fingers, “—dat make him
thirteen or fo’teen, I b’lieve, suh.”
“Too young,” said the massa. “You go tell that fiddler to
take over. He’s not doing that much in the garden, or with
his fiddle either, lately. Have him hitch up the horses and
get around front right away.”

On her way to the fiddler’s cabin, Bell guessed that he’d
be either very indifferent or very upset about the news. He
was both. He didn’t seem to care one way or the other
about having to drive the massa, but when he learned that
Kunta was ill, the fiddler got so concerned that she had to
talk him out of stopping off at their cabin before picking up
the massa.
From that day on, the fiddler was a changed man—
certainly no happier than he’d been acting for the past few
months, but caring, considerate, and tireless as he drove
the massa all about the county day and night, and then
came home to help Bell care for Kunta and others on slave
row who also had come down with the fever.
Before long, so many people were sick—both on the
plantation and off—that the massa pressed Bell into
service as his assistant. While he attended the whites, the
boy Noah drove her around in the mulecart taking care of
the blacks. “Massa got his medicines, I got mine,” she
confided to the fiddler. After administering the massa’s
drugs, she gave her patients her secret brew of dried,
powdered herbs mixed with water from boiled persimmon
tree bark—that she swore would work better and faster
than any white folks remedy. But what would really cure
them, she confided to Sister Mandy and Aunt Sukey, was
that always she knelt down at a patient’s bedside and
prayed for them. “Whatever He bring on man, He can take
away if He want to,” she said. But some of her patients died
anyway—as well as Massa Waller’s.
As Kunta’s own condition steadily worsened, despite
everything Bell and the massa could do, her prayers
became more and more fervent. Kunta’s strange, silent,
stubborn ways had been entirely forgotten as, herself too
tired to sleep, she sat by his bed each night as he lay
sweating heavily, tossing, moaning, or at times babbling in
spells of delirium beneath the several quilts she’d piled on
him. She would hold his hot, dry hand in hers, desperately
afraid that she might never be able to tell him what had
taken this, after all these years, for her fully to realize: that
he was a man of caliber, of strength, and of character, that

she had never known the equal of, and she loved him very
deeply.
He had been in a coma for three days when Missy Anne
came to visit the massa and found Kizzy in the cabin, with
Bell, Sister Mandy, and Aunt Sukey, all of them weeping
and praying. Tearful herself, Missy Anne returned to the big
house and told the weary Massa Waller that she wanted to
read something from the Bible for Kizzy’s pappy. But she
said she didn’t know what would be a good place to read
from, so would he please show her? The massa’s eyes
drank in the wet-eyed earnestness of his beloved niece,
and getting up from the couch, he unlocked his bookcase
and took out his big Bible. After a thoughtful moment, he
turned to a page and pointed out with his forefinger the
exact spot where she should begin.
As the word passed in slave row that Missy Anne was
going to read something, everyone quickly assembled
outside Bell and Kunta’s cabin, and she started to read:
“The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want. He maketh me
to lie down in green pastures: He leadeth me beside the
still waters. He restoreth my soul: He leadeth me in the
paths of righteousness for His name’s sake.” Missy Anne
paused, frowning at the page, then went on. “Yea, though I
walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no
evil, for Thou art with me; Thy rod and Thy staff they comfort
me.” She paused again, this time for a deep breath, and
looked up uncertainly at the faces watching her.
Deeply moved, Sister Mandy couldn’t stop herself from
exclaiming, “Lawd, listen to dat chile! Done growed up an’
learnt to read so good!”
Amid a hubbub of praises from others, Noah’s mother
Ada marveled, “Look like jes’ yestiddy she runnin’ roun’
here in diapers! How ol’ she now?”
“Ain’t long turnt fo’teen!” said Bell as proudly as if she
were her own. “Please read us a l’il mo’, honey!”
Flushed with their compliments, Missy Anne read the
final verse of the Twenty-third Psalm.
Between treatment and prayer, a few days later Kunta
showed signs of beginning to rally. Bell knew he was going

to be all right when he glared at her and snatched from
around his neck the dried rabbit’s foot and the bag of
asafoetida she had tied there to ward off further bad luck
and sickness. And Kizzy knew it when she whispered into
his ear that on the past new-moon morning she had put a
pretty pebble into his gourd, and his drawn face found a
broad smile. And Kunta knew that the fiddler was going to
be all right when Kunta waked up one morning with a start
to the sound of fiddling beside his bed.
“I mus’ be dreamin’,” said Kunta, opening his eyes.
“Not no mo’, you ain’t,” said the fiddler. “I’se sick an’ tired
o’ drivin’ yo’ massa all over hell an’ gone. Got burn holes in
my coat from his eyes at my back. Time you either git up or
move over, nigger!”

CHAPTER 81
Kunta was sitting up in bed the next day when he heard
Kizzy enter the cabin laughing and chattering with Missy
Anne, who was on vacation from school, and he heard them
pulling back chairs to sit at the table in the next room.
“Kizzy, have you studied your lessons?” Missy Anne
sternly demanded, playing teacher.
“Yes, ma’am,” snickered Kizzy.
“Very well, then—what’s that?”
After a short silence, the intently listening Kunta heard
Kizzy falter that she couldn’t remember.
“It’s a D,” said Missy Ann “Now what’s this one?”
Almost instantly Kizzy cried triumphantly, “Dat’s dat
circle, a O!”
Both girls laughed happily.
“Good! You ain’t forgot it. Now, what’s that?”
“Ah ... uh ... um ...” Then Kizzy exulted, “Dat’s G!”
“Right!”
After another brief silence, Missy Anne said, “Now, see
that? D-O-G. What’s that?”
Kizzy’s silence told him that she didn’t know—as neither
did he.
“Dog!” Missy Anne exclaimed. “You hear me? Don’t
forget, DO-G! You got to learn all the letters good, then we’ll
do some more about how they make words.”
After the girls left the cabin, Kunta lay thinking hard. He
couldn’t help feeling some pride in Kizzy’s learning ability.
On another hand, he couldn’t stomach that it was toubob
things her head was being stuffed with. It maybe explained
why lately she had seemed to show less interest in their
conversations about Africa. It might be too late, but he
wondeied if he should reconsider his decision not to teach
her how to read in Arabic. But then he thought that would be
as foolish as encouraging her to continue her lessons with
Missy Anne. Suppose Massa Waller were to discover that
Kizzy could read—in any language! That would be a good

way to end the white girl’s “schoolteaching,” and yet better,
it might even end their relationship. But the trouble was that
Kunta couldn’t be sure the massa would let the matter stop
at that. So Kizzy’s “school” continued at least two or three
times weekly, until Missy Anne had to return to her own
daily studies—about the time that Kunta, now adequately
recovered, returned to relieve the happy fiddler of driving
the massa in his buggy.
But even after Missy Anne was gone, night after night, as
Bell sewed or knitted and Kunta rocked in his chair before
the fireplace, Kizzy would sit bent over the table, her pencil
almost touching her cheek, carefully copying words from a
book Missy Anne had given her or from a torn piece of one
of the massa’s discarded newspapers. Sitting with his
back to them, Kunta sometimes would hear Kizzy involve
Bell, although Kizzy knew of her mother’s ability to read and
write a bit herself.
“Naw, dat’s a A, Mammy,” Kizzy might explain, “an’ dat’s
a O. It ain’t nothin’ but a l’il circle.”
In time, she began to move on to words, just as Missy
Anne did with her. “Dat’s ‘dog,’ an’ dat’s ‘cat’ ... an’ dat
dere’s ‘Kizzy’ ... an’ dis here’s yo’ name, B-E-L-L. How you
like dat? You write it now.” And Bell would made a great
pretense of struggling with the pencil as she scrawled it out,
deliberately making some mistakes so that Kizzy would
have a chance to correct her. “You does like I shows you,
Mammy, you can write good as me,” said Kizzy, proud of
having something to teach her mother for a change.
One night a few weeks later, after Kizzy had fallen asleep
at the table after hours of copying her latest writing lesson
from Missy Anne, Bell sent her daughter to bed and soon
after herself lay alongside Kunta and said quietly, “Ain’t no
game no mo’. Dat chile awready know more’n I does. I jes’
hopes it be’s awright, Lawd have mercy!”
Over the months that followed, Kizzy and Missy Anne
continued to visit one another, mostly on weekends, but not
every weekend, and after a while, Kunta began to detect—
or wishfully felt that he did—if not exactly a cooling between
the two of them, at least some slow, subtle ebbing in their

closeness, a gradual growing apart as Missy Anne began
to ripen toward young womanhood four years ahead of
Kizzy.
Finally the milestone of her long-awaited sixteenth
birthday was about to arrive, but three days before the party
that was being planned, the willful, hot-headed Missy Anne
galloped angrily over to Massa Waller’s house—bareback
on their buggy horse—and told him, amid copious tears,
that her sickly mother was affecting one of her week-long
headaches as an effort to call it off. And with much pouting,
eyelash fluttering, and tugging his sleeve, she implored him
to let her party be at his house instead. Unable to refuse her
anything she’d ever asked, he said yes, of course, and as
Roosby rushed all over the county informing the dozens of
teenaged guests about the change of address, Bell and
Kizzy helped Missy Anne with all of the frantic last-minute
preparations. They were completed barely in time for Kizzy
to help Missy Anne into her party gown and downstairs to
greet her guests.
But then, as Bell told Kunta later, from the moment the
first carriage arrived, Missy Anne suddenly had acted as if
she didn’t even know the starchly uniformed aproned Kizzy,
who kept circulating among the guests bearing trays of
refreshments, “till de po’ chile come bustin’ in de kitchen
cryin’ her eyes out.” That night in the cabin, Kizzy was still
weeping as Bell tried to comfort her. “She jes done growed
up into a young missy, now, honey, an’ her mind on dem
kind o’ things. Ain’t she think no less o’ you, or really meant
no harm. Dis time always come, fo’ any us dat’s growed up
real close wid white young’uns, when you jes’ got to go yo’
own way, an dey goes dere’s.”
Kunta sat seething with the same emotions he had felt
when he had first seen Missy Anne playing with the infant
Kizzy in her basket. Across the twelve rains since then, he
had asked Allah many times to end the toubob girl’s
closeness to his Kizzy—and though finally his prayers had
been answered, still it both hurt and angered him to see her
so deeply wounded. But it had been necessary, and surely
from this experience she would learn and remember.

Moreover, from the tightness that Kunta had seen in Bell’s
face as she had been talking to Kizzy, he felt some hope
that even Bell might have gotten cured of at least some of
her sickening great affection for the obviously treacherous,
conniving “young missy.”
Missy Anne still continued to visit at Massa Waller’s,
although much less often than before since—as Roosby
confided to Bell—young massas had begun to occupy her
time. When she visited, she always saw Kizzy; and usually
she’d bring along an old dress for Bell to “let out” for Kizzy,
who was physically bigger, despite being years younger.
But now, as if by some unspoken agreement, the two of
them would spend around a half hour together, walking and
talking quietly in the backyard near slave row, and then
Missy Anne would leave.
Kizzy would always stand looking after her, then very
quickly she would walk back into the cabin and bury herself
in study, often reading and writing until suppertime. Kunta
still didn’t like the idea of her increasing abilities to do
either, but he accepted that she must have something to
occupy herself with now that she’d lost her lifelong friend.
His Kizzy was herself now approaching adolescence, he
reflected, which likely was going to present them both with
a whole new area of worries.
Just after Christmas of the next year—1803—the winds
blew the snow into deep, feathery drifts until in places the
roads were hidden and impassable for all but the biggest
wagons. When the massa went out—in response to only
the most desperate summons—he had to ride on one of
the horses, and Kunta stayed behind, busily helping Cato,
Noah, and the fiddler to keep the driveway clear and to
chop wood to keep all of the fireplaces steadily going.
Cut off as they were—even from Massa Waller’s
Gazette, which had stopped arriving about a month before
with the first big snow—the slave-row people were still
talking about the last bits of news that had gotten through to
them: how pleased the white massas were with the way
President Jefferson was “runnin’ the gubmint,” despite the
massas’ initial reservations toward his views regarding

slaves. Since taking office, President Jefferson had
reduced the size of the Army and Navy, lowered the public
debt, even abolished the personal property tax—that last
act, the fiddler said, particularly having impressed those of
the massa class with his greatness.
But Kunta said that when he had made his last trip to the
county seat before they had gotten snowed in, white folks
had seemed to him even more excited about President
Jefferson’s purchase of the huge “Louisiana Territory” for
but three cents an acre. “What I likes ’bout it,” he said,
“’cordin’ to what I heared, dat Massa Napoleon had to sell it
so cheap ’cause he in sich hot water in France over what it
cost ’im in money, long wid fifty thousan’ Frenchmans got
killed or died fo’ dey beat dat Toussaint in Haiti.”
They were all still warming themselves in the glow of that
thought a later afternoon when a black rider arrived amid a
snow-storm with an urgently ill patient’s message for the
massa—and another of dismal news for the slave row. In a
damp dungeon on a remote French mountain where
Napoleon had sent him, Haiti’s General Toussaint had died
of cold and starvation.
Three days later, Kunta was still feeling stricken and
depressed when he trudged back to the cabin one
afternoon for a mug of hot soup, and stamping snow from
his shoes, then entering pulling off his gloves, he found
Kizzy stretched out on her pallet in the front room, her face
drawn and frightened. “She feelin’ po’ly,” was the
explanation that Bell offered as she strained a cup of her
herb tea and ordered Kizzy to sit up and drink it. Kunta
sensed that something more was being kept from him; then
when he was a few more minutes there in the over-warm,
tightly closed, mud-chinked cabin, his nostrils helped him to
guess that Kizzy was experiencing her first time of the
bloodiness.
He had watched his Kizzy growing and maturing almost
every day now for nearly thirteen rains, and he had lately
come to accept within himself that her ripening into
womanhood would be only a matter of time, yet somehow
he felt completely unprepared for this pungent evidence.

After another day abed, though, the hardy Kizzy was back
up and about in the cabin, then back at work in the big
house—and it was as if overnight that Kunta began actually
noticing for the first time how his girlchild’s always
previously narrow body had budded. With a kind of
embarrassed awe, he saw that somehow she had gotten
mango-sized breasts and that her buttocks had begun to
swell and curve. She even seemed to be walking in a less
girlish way. Now, whenever he came through the bedroom
separator curtain into the front room where Kizzy slept, he
began to avert his eyes, and whenever Kizzy happened not
to be clothed fully, he sensed that she felt the same.
In Africa now, he thought—Africa had sometimes
seemed so distantly in the past—Bell would be instructing
Kizzy in how to make her skin shine using shea-tree butter,
and how to fashionably beautifully blacken her mouth,
palms, and soles, using the powdered crust from the
bottom of cooking pots. And Kizzy would at her present age
already be starting to attract men who were seeking for
themselves a finely raised, well-trained, virginal young wife.
Kunta felt jolted even by the thought of some man’s foto
entering Kizzy’s thighs; then he felt better after reassuring
himself that this would happen only after a proper wedding.
In his homeland at this time, as Kizzy’s fa, he would be
assuming his responsibility to appraise very closely the
personal qualities as well as the family backgrounds of
whatever men began to show marriageable interest in
Kizzy—in order to select the most ideal of them for her, and
he would also be deciding now what proper bride price
would be asked for her hand.
But after a while, as he continued to shovel snow along
with the fiddler, young Noah, and Cato, Kunta found himself
gradually feeling increasingly ridiculous that he was even
thinking about these African customs and traditions
anymore, for not only would they never be observed here,
nor respected—indeed, he would also be hooted at if he so
much as mentioned them, even to other blacks. And
anyway, he couldn’t think of any likely, well-qualified suitor
for Kizzy who was of proper marriageable age—between

thirty and thirty-five rains—but there he was doing it again!
He was going to have to force himself to start thinking along
lines of the marrying customs here in the toubob’s country
—where girls generally married—“jumpin’ de broom,” it
was called—someone who was around their same age.
Immediately then Kunta began thinking about Noah. He
had always liked the boy. At fifteen, two years older than
Kizzy, Noah seemed to be no less mature, serious, and
responsible than he was big and strong. The more Kunta
thought about it, the only thing he could find lacking with
Noah, in fact, was that he had never seemed to show the
slightest personal interest in Kizzy—not to mention that
Kizzy herself seemed to act as if Noah didn’t exist. Kunta
pondered: Why weren’t they any more interested than that
in each other, at the least in being friends? After all, Noah
was very much as he himself had been as a young man,
and therefore he was highly worthy of Kizzy’s attention, if
not her admiration. He wondered: Wasn’t there something
he could do to influence them into each other’s paths? But
then Kunta sensed that probably would be the best way to
insure their never getting together. He decided, as usual,
that it was wisest that he mind his own business—and, as
he had heard Bell put it, with “de sap startin’ to rise” within
the young pair of them who were living right there in the
same slave row, he privately would ask if Allah would
consider helping nature to take its course.

CHAPTER 82
“You listen here, gal, don’ you never lemme hear ’bout you
fannin’ yo’ tail roun’ dat Noah no mo’! I take a hik’ry stick to
you in a minute.” Headed home, Kunta stopped in his
tracks two or three steps from the door of the cabin and
stood listening as Bell went on: “Why, you ain’t even turned
sixteen yet! What yo’ pappy think, you carryin’ on like dat?”
He quietly turned and went back down along the path to
the privacy of the barn, to consider the implications of what
he had heard. “Fannin’ her tail”—around Noah! Bell
personally hadn’t seen whatever it was, but someone had
told her. No doubt it had been Aunt Sukey or Sister Mandy:
Knowing those old biddies, it wouldn’t surprise him if either
or both of them had witnessed something completely
innocent and made it sound suggestive just to have
something to cluck about. But what? From what he’d
overheard, Bell probably wouldn’t tell him unless it was
repeated and she needed him to put a stop to it. It was a
kind of thing he’d never dream of querying Bell about, for
that was too much like women’s gossip.
But what if it hadn’t been so innocent? Had Kizzy been
flaunting herself before Noah? And if she had, what had he
done to encourage it? He had seemed to be a young man
of honor, of good character—but you never knew.
Kunta wasn’t sure how to feel or what to think. In any
case, as Bell had said, their daughter was only fifteen,
which in the customs of the toubob’s land was still too
young for her to be thinking about getting married. He
realized that he wasn’t feeling very African about it, but
somehow he just didn’t feel ready to think about Kizzy
walking around with a big belly as he’d seen on so many
girls her age, even younger.
If she did marry Noah, though, he thought, at least their
child would be black and not one of those pale sasso borro
babies, products of the mothers having been raped by
lusting massas or overseers. Kunta thanked Allah that

neither his Kizzy nor any other slave-row women ever had
faced that horrifying experience, or at least not since he
had been there, for countless times he had heard Massa
Waller strongly expressing among friends his convictions
against white and black bloods being mixed.
The next few weeks, as the opportunity would present,
Kunta covertly watched Kizzy’s bottom for any signs of
wiggling. He never caught her at it, but once or twice both
he and she were startled when he came upon her in the
cabin twirling round and round, tossing her head and
humming dreamily to herself. Kunta also kept a close eye
on Noah; he noticed that now—unlike before—Noah and
Kizzy would nod and smile whenever they passed each
other within the sight of anyone else. The more he mused
on it, the more strongly he speculated that they were
skillfully concealing their ardor. After a while Kunta decided
that there should be no harm in Noah and Kizzy’s publicly
taking conversational walks together, in his accompanying
her to camp meeting, or to the “dance-ol’-Jenny-down”
frolics that were held each summer, where Noah as her
partner would surely be preferable to some impudent
stranger. Indeed, it was possible that, after another rain or
so for them both, Noah might even make Kizzy a good
mate.
An awareness began to dawn within Kunta that Noah had
begun to observe him, just as closely as the other way
around, and now Kunta anticipated, nervously, that the boy
was trying to muster the nerve to ask if he could marry
Kizzy. It was on a Sunday afternoon in early April—Massa
Waller had brought a family of guests home with him after
church, and Kunta was outside the barn polishing the
guests’ buggy—when something told him to glance up, and
he saw the dark, slender Noah walking purposefully down
along the path from slave row.
Reaching Kunta, he spoke without hesitation, as if his
words were rehearsed: “Ol’ suh, you’s de onlest one I feels
like I can trust. I got to tell somebody. I can’t live no mo’ like
dis. I got to run away.”
Kunta was so astounded that at first he could think of

nothing to say—he just stood there staring at Noah.
Kunta finally found some words. “You ain’t gon’ run
nowhere wid Kizzy!” It wasn’t a question but a statement.
“Nawsuh, wouldn’t want to git ’er in no trouble.”
Kunta felt embarrassed. After a while he said
noncommittally, “Reckon sometime ever’body feel like
runnin’.”
Noah’s eyes inspected his. “Kizzy tol’ me Miss Bell say
you run off fo’ times.”
Kunta nodded, his face still showing nothing of how he
was thinking back on himself at the same age, freshly
arrived, so desperately obsessed with run, run, run that
every day spent waiting and watching for the next even halfdecent opportunity was an unbearable torment. A swift
realization thrust itself into his head that if Kizzy didn’t know,
as Noah’s earlier statement could be interpreted she didn’t,
then whenever her loved one suddenly disappeared, she
was sure to be utterly devastated—so soon again after her
crushing heartbreak involving the toubob girl. He thought
that it just couldn’t be helped. He thought that, for numerous
reasons, whatever he said to Noah must be considered
carefully.
He said gravely, “Ain’t gwine tell you run or don’t run. But
less’n you ready to die if you gits caught, you ain’t ready.”
“Ain’t plannin’ to git caught,” said Noah. “I’se heared de
main thing is you follows de Nawth Star, an’ it’s different
Quaker white folks an’ free niggers he’ps you hide in de
daytimes. Den you’s free once you hits dat Ohio.”
How little he knows, thought Kunta. How could escaping
seem anywhere near so simple? But then he realized that
Noah was young—as he had been; also that like most
slaves, Noah had seldom set foot beyond the boundaries of
his plantation. This was why most of those who ran, field
hands especially, were usually captured so soon, bleeding
from briar cuts, half starved and stumbling around in forests
and swamps full of water moccasins and rattlesnakes. In a
rush, Kunta remembered the running, the dogs, the guns,
the whips—the ax.
“You don’ know what you talkm’ ’bout, boy!” he rasped,

regretting his words almost as they were uttered. “What I
mean to say—it jes’ ain’t dat easy! You know ’bout dem
bloodhounds dey uses to cotch you?”
Noah’s right hand slid into his pocket and withdrew a
knife. He flicked it open, the blade honed until it gleamed
dully. “I figgers dead dogs don’t eat nobody.” Cato had said
that Noah feared nothing. “Jes’ can’t let nothin’ stop me,”
Noah said, closing the knife and returning it into his pocket.
“Well, if you gwine run, you gwine run,” said Kunta.
“Don’t know ’zactly when,” said Noah. “Jes’ knows I got to
go.” Kunta re-emphasized awkwardly, “Jes’ make sho’
Kizzy ain’t in none o’ dis.”
Noah didn’t seem offended. His eyes met Kunta’s
squarely. “Naw-suh.” He hesitated. “But when I gits Nawth, I
means to work an’ buy her free.” He paused. “You ain’t gon’
tell her none o’ dis, is you?”
Now Kunta hesitated. Then he said, “Dat ’tween you and
her.”
“I tell her in good time,” said Noah.
Impulsively, Kunta grasped the young man’s hand
between both of his own. “I hopes you makes it.”
“Well, I see you!” said Noah, and he turned to walk back
toward slave row.
Sitting that night in the cabin’s front room, staring into the
low flames of the hickory log burning in the fireplace, Kunta
wore a faraway expression that made both Bell and Kizzy
know out of past experiences that it would be futile to make
any effort to talk with him. Quietly Bell knitted. Kizzy was as
usual hunched over the table practicing her writing. At
sunup, Kunta decided he would ask Allah to grant Noah
good luck. He thought afresh that if Noah did get away, it
would yet again crush utterly Kizzy’s trusting faith that
already had been wounded so badly by Missy Anne. He
glanced up and watched his precious Kizzy’s face as her
lips moved silently, following her finger across a page. The
lives of all black people in the toubob land seemed full of
suffering, but he wished he could spare her some of it.

CHAPTER 83
It was a week after Kizzy’s sixteenth birthday, the early
morning of the first Monday of October, when the slave-row
field hands were gathering as usual to leave for their day’s
work, when someone asked curiously, “Where Noah at?”
Kunta, who happened to be standing nearby talking to
Cato, knew immediately that he was gone. He saw heads
glancing around, Kizzy’s among them, straining to maintain
a mask of casual surprise. Their eyes met—she had to look
away.
“Thought he was out here early wid you,” said Noah’s
mother Ada to Cato.
“Naw, I was aimin’ to give ’im de debbil fo’ sleepin’ late,”
said Cato.
Cato went banging his fist at the closed door of the
cabin, once occupied by the old gardener, but which Noah
had inherited recently on his eighteenth birthday. Jerking
the door open, Cato charged inside, shouting angrily,
“Noah!” He came out looking worried. “Am’t like ’im,” he
said quietly. Then he ordered everyone to go quickly and
search their cabins, the toilet, the storerooms, the fields.
All the others ran off in all directions; Kunta volunteered to
search the barn. “NOAH! NOAH!” he called loudly for the
benefit of any who might hear, although he knew there was
no need of it, as the animals in their stalls stopped chewing
their morning hay to look at him oddly. Then, peering from
the door and seeing no one coming that way, Kunta
hastened back inside to climb quickly to the hayloft, where
he prostrated himself and made his second appeal to Allah
for Noah’s successful escape.
Cato worriedly dispatched the rest of the field hands off
to their work, telling them that he and the fiddler would join
them shortly; the fiddler had wisely volunteered to help with
the fieldwork ever since his income from playing for dances
had fallen off.
“B’lieve he done run,” the fiddler muttered to Kunta as

they stood in the backyard.
As Kunta grunted, Bell said, “He ain’t never been missin’,
an’ he don’t slip off nights.”
Then Cato said what was uppermost in all of their minds.
“Gwine have to tell massa, Lawd have mercy!” After a
hurried consultation, Bell recommmended that Massa
Waller not be told until after he had eaten his breakfast,
“’case de boy done jes’ eased off somewhere an’ got scairt
to slip back fo’ it’s dark again, less’n dem road paterollers
cotches ’im.”
Bell served the massa his favorite breakfast—canned
peaches in heavy cream, hickory-smoked fried ham,
scrambled eggs, grits, heated apple butter, and buttermilk
biscuits—and waited for him to ask for his second cup of
coffee before speaking.
“Massa—” she swallowed, “—Massa, Cato ax me to tell
you look like dat boy Noah ain’t here dis mawnin’!”
The massa set down his cup, frowning. “Where is he,
then? Are you trying to tell me he’s off drunk or tomcatting
somewhere, and you think he’ll slip back today, or are you
saying you think he’s trying to run?”
“All us sayin’, Massa,” Bell quavered, “is seem like he
ain’t here, an’ us done searched eve’ywheres.”
Massa Waller studied his coffee cup. “I’ll give him until
tonight—no, tomorrow morning—before I take action.”
“Massa, he a good boy, born and bred right here on yo’
place, an’ work good all his life, ain’t never give you, or
nobody a minute’s trouble—”
He looked levelly at Bell. “If he’s trying to run, he’ll be
sorry.”
“Yassuh, Massa.” Bell fled to the yard, where she told the
others what the massa had said. But no sooner had Cato
and the fiddler hurried off toward the fields than Massa
Waller called Bell back and ordered the buggy.
All day long, as he drove him from one patient to the next,
Kunta soared from exhilaration—as he thought of Noah
running—to anguish as he thought of the thorns and the
briars and the dogs. And he felt what hope and suffering
Kizzy must be enduring.

At that night’s huddled gathering, everyone spoke barely
above whispers.
“Dat boy done lef’ here. Fo’ now, I done seed it in his
eyes,” Aunt Sukey said.
“Well, I knows he ain’t no young’un to jes’ steal off gittin’
drunk, no suh!” said Sister Mandy.
Noah’s mother Ada was hoarse from a day of weeping.
“My baby sho’ ain’t never talked to me nothin’ ’bout no
runnin’! Lawd, y’all reckon massa gwine sell ’im?” No one
chose to reply.
When they returned to their cabin, Kizzy burst into tears
the moment she got inside; Kunta felt helpless and tonguetied. But without a word, Bell went over to the table, put her
arms around her sobbing daughter, and pulled her head
against her stomach.
Tuesday morning came, still with no sign of Noah, and
Massa Waller ordered Kunta to drive him to the county
seat, where he went directly to the Spotsylvania jailhouse.
After about half an hour, he came out with the sheriff,
ordering Kunta brusquely to tie the sheriff’s horse behind
the buggy and then to drive them home. “We’ll be dropping
the sheriff off at the Creek Road,” said the massa.
“So many niggers runnin’ these days, can’t hardly keep
track they’d ruther take their chances in the woods than get
sold down South—” The sheriff was talking from when the
buggy started rolling.
“Since I’ve had a plantation,” said Massa Waller, “I’ve
never sold one of mine unless my rules were broken, and
they know that well.”
“But it’s mighty rare niggers appreciate good masters,
Doctor, you know that,” said the sheriff. “You say this boy
around eighteen? Well, I’d guess if he’s like most field
hands his age, there’s fair odds he’s tryin’ to make it North.”
Kunta stiffened. “If he was a house nigger, they’re generally
slicker, faster talkers, they like to try passin’ themselves off
as free niggers or tell the road patrollers they’re on their
master’s errands and lost their traveling passes, tryin’ to
make it to Richmond or some other big city where they can
easier hide among so many niggers and maybe find jobs.”

The sheriff paused. “Besides his mammy on your place,
this boy of yours got any other kin livin’ anywheres he might
be tryin’ to get to?”
“None that I know of.”
“Well, would you happen to know if he’s got some gal
somewhere, because these young bucks get their sap
risin’, they’ll leave your mule in the field and take off.”
“Not to my knowledge,” said the massa. “But there’s a
gal on my place, my cook’s young’un, she’s still fairly young,
fifteen or sixteen, if I guess correctly. I don’t know if they’ve
been haystacking or not.”
Kunta nearly quit breathing.
“I’ve known ’em to have pickaninnies at the age of
twelve!” the sheriff chortled. “Plenty of these young nigger
wenches even draw white men, and nigger boys’ll do
anything!”
Through churning outrage, Kunta heard Massa Waller’s
abrupt chilliness. “I have the least possible personal contact
with my slaves, and neither know nor concern myself
regarding their personal affairs!”
“Yes, yes, of course,” said the sheriff quickly.
But then the massa’s tone eased. “Along your line of
thinking, though, this boy could have slipped off to see
some other plantation gal. I don’t know, and of course the
others wouldn’t say if they did. In fact, anything might have
happened—some fight, perhaps; he could be half dead
somewhere. It’s even possible that some of these slavestealing poor whites could have grabbed him. That’s been
going on around here, as you know; even some of the more
unscrupulous traders engage in it. Again, I don’t know. But
I’m told this is the boy’s first time being unaccounted for.”
His general manner now more careful, the sheriff said,
“You told me he was born on your place and never traveled
much?”
“I’d guess he wouldn’t have any idea how to get even to
Richmond, let alone North,” said the massa.
“Niggers exchange a lot of information, though,” the
sheriff said. “We’ve picked up some and beat it out of them
that they practically had maps in their heads of where they’d

been told to run and where to hide. A lot of this can be
traced to nigger-loving white people like the Quakers and
Methodists. But since he ain’t never been nowhere, ain’t
never tried runnin’ before, and ain’t never give you no other
trouble to now, sounds like to me a good bet a couple more
nights in the woods might bring him back, scared to death
and half starved. A nigger’s powerfully moved by a hungry
belly. And that’ll save you spending to advertise in the
Gazette or hiring some of these nigger catchers with their
dogs to track him. He just don’t sound to my experience like
one of them hard, outlaw niggers that’s slipping around in
and out of the swamps and woods right now, killing
people’s cattle and hogs like they would rabbits.”
“I hope you’re right,” said Massa Waller, “but whatever
the case, he’s broken my rules by leaving without
permission to begin with, so I’ll be selling him South
immediately.” Kunta’s fists squeezed the reins so tightly
that his nails dug into his palms. “Then that’s a good twelve
to fifteen hundred dollars you’ve got runnin’ around loose
somewhere,” said the sheriff. “You’ve written me his
description, I’ll sure get it to the county road patrollers, and
if we pick ’im up—or we hear anything—I’ll let you know
right away.”
Saturday morning after breakfast, Kunta was
currycombing a horse outside the barn when he thought he
heard Cato’s whip-poor-will whistle. Cocking his head, he
heard it again. He tied the horse quickly to a nearby post
and cripped rapidly up the path to the cabin. From its front
window he could see almost from where the main road
intersected with the big-house driveway. Inside the big
house, he knew that Cato’s call had also alerted Bell and
Kizzy.
Then he saw the wagon rolling down the driveway—and
with surging alarm recognized the sheriff at the reins.
Merciful Allah, had Noah been caught? As he watched the
sheriff dismount, Kunta’s long-trained instincts tugged at
him to hasten out and provide the visitor’s winded horse
with water and a rubdown, but it was as if he were
paralyzed where he stood, staring, from the cabin window,

as the sheriff hurried up the big-house front steps two at a
time.
Only a few minutes passed before Kunta saw Bell almost
stumbling out the back door. She started running—and
Kunta was seized with a horrible premonition the instant
before she nearly snatched their cabin door off its hinges.
Her face was twisted, tear-streaked. “Sheriff an’ massa
talkin’ to Kizzy!” she squealed.
The words numbed him. For a moment he just stared
disbelievingly at her, but then violently seizing and shaking
her, he demanded, “What he want?”
Her voice rising, choking, breaking, she managed to tell
him that the sheriff was scarcely in the house before the
massa had yelled for Kizzy to come from tidying his room
upstairs. “When I heared him holler at her from de kitchen, I
flew to git in de drawin’ room hallway where I always listens
from, but I couldn’t make out nothin’ clear ’cept he was
mighty mad—” Bell gasped and swallowed. “Den heared
massa ringin’ my bell, an’ I run back to look like I was
comin’ from de cookhouse. But massa was a-waitin’ in de
do’way, wid his han’ holdin’ de knob behin’ him. Ain’t never
seed ’im look like he did at me. He tol’ me col’ as ice to git
out’n de house an’ stay out ’til I’m sent for!” Bell moved to
the small window, staring at the big house, unable to
believe that what she had just said had really happened.
“Lawd Gawd, what in de worl’ sheriff want wid my chile?”
she asked incredulously.
Kunta’s mind was clawing desperately for something to
do. Could he rush out to the fields, at lease to alert those
who were chopping there? But his instincts said that
anything could happen with him gone.
As Bell went through the curtains, into their bedroom,
beseeching Jesus at the top of her lungs, he could barely
restrain himself from raging in and yelling that she must see
now what he had been trying to tell her for nearly forty rains
about being so gullible, deluded, and deceived about the
goodness of the massa—or any other toubob.
“Gwine back in dere!” cried Bell suddenly. She came
charging through the curtain and out the door.

Kunta watched as she disappeared inside the kitchen.
What was she going to do? He ran out after her and peered
in through the screen door. The kitchen was empty and the
inside door was swinging shut. He went inside, silencing
the screen door as it closed, and tiptoed across the
kitchen. Standing there with one hand on the door, the other
clenched, he strained his ears for the slightest sound—but
all he could hear was his own labored breathing.
Then he heard: “Massa?” Bell had called softly. There
was no answer.
“Massa?” she called again, louder, sharply.
He heard the drawing room dooor open.
“Where my Kizzy, Massa?”
“She’s in my safekeeping,” he said stonily. “We’re not
having another one running off.”
“I jes’ don’t understan’ you, Massa.” Bell spoke so softly
that Kunta could hardly hear her. “De chile ain’t been out’n
yo’ yard, hardly.”
The massa started to say something, then stopped. “It’s
possible you really don’t know what she’s done,” he said.
“The boy Noah has been captured, but not before severely
knifing the two road patrolmen who challenged a false
traveling pass he was carrying. After being subdued by
force, he finally confessed that the pass had been written
not by me but by your daughter. She has admitted it to the
sheriff.”
There was silence for a long, agonizing moment, then
Kunta heard a scream and running footsteps. As he
whipped open the door, Bell came bolting past him—
shoving him aside with the force of a man—and out the
back door. The hall was empty, the drawing room door
shut. He ran out after her, catching up with her at the cabin
door.
“Massa gon’ sell Kizzy, I knows it!” Bell started
screaming, and inside him something snapped. “Gwine git
’er!” he choked out, cripping back toward the big house
and into the kitchen as fast as he could go, with Bell not far
behind. Wild with fury, he snatched open the inside door
and went changing down the unspeakably forbidden

hallway.
The massa and the sheriff spun with disbelieving faces
as the drawing room door came jerking open. Kunta halted
there abruptly, his eyes burning with murder. Bell screamed
from behind him, “Where our baby at? We come to git ’er!”
Kunta saw the sheriff’s right hand sliding toward his
holstered gun as the massa seethed, “Get out!”
“You niggers can’t hear?” The sheriff’s hand was
withdrawing the pistol, and Kunta was tensed to plunge for
it—just as Bell’s voice trembled behind him “Yassa”—and
he felt her desperately pulling his arm. Then his feet were
moving backward throught the doorway—and suddenly the
door was slammed behind them, a key clicking sharply in
the lock.
As Kunta crouched with his wife in the hall, drowning in
his shame, they heard some tense, muted conversation
between the massa and the sheriff ... then the sound of feet
moving, scuffling faintly ... then Kizzy’s crying, and the sound
of the front door slamming shut.
“Kizzy! Kizzy chile! Lawd Gawd, don’t let ’em sell my
Kizzy!” As she burst out the back door with Kunta behind
her, Bell’s screams reached away out to where the field
hands were, who came racing. Cato arrived in time to see
Bell screeching insanely, springing up and down with Kunta
bearhugging her to the ground. Massa Waller was
descending the front steps ahead of the sheriff, who was
hauling Kizzy after him—weeping and jerking herself
backward—at the end of a chain.
“Mammy! Maaaaaaamy!” Kizzy screamed.
Bell and Kunta leaped up from the ground and went
raging around the side of the house like two charging lions.
The sheriff drew his gun and pointed it straight at Bell: She
stopped in her tracks. She stared at Kizzy. Bell tore the
question from her throat: “You done dis thing deys says?”
They all watched Kizzy’s agony as her reddened, weeping
eyes gave her answer in a mute way—darting imploringly
from Bell and Kunta to the sheriff and the massa—but she
said nothing.
“O my Lawd Gawd!” Bell shrieked. “Massa, please have

mercy! She ain’t meant to do it! She ain’t knowed what she
was doin’! Missy Anne de one teached ’er to write!”
Massa Waller spoke glacially. “The law is the law. She’s
broken my rules. She’s committed a felony. She may have
aided in a murder. I’m told one of those white men may
die.”
“Ain’t her cut de man, Massa! Massa, she worked for you
ever since she big ’nough to carry your slopjar! An’ I done
cooked an’ waited on you han’ an’ foot over forty years, an’
he ...” gesturing at Kunta, she stuttered, “he done driv you
eve’ywhere you been for near ’bout dat long. Massa, don’
all dat count for sump’n?”
Massa Waller would not look directly at her. “You were
doing your jobs. She’s going to be sold—that’s all there is
to it.”
“Jes’ cheap, low-class white folks splits up families!”
shouted Bell. “You ain’t dat kin’!”
Angrily, Massa Waller gestured to the sheriff, who began
to wrench Kizzy roughly toward the wagon.
Bell blocked their path. “Den sell me an’ ’er pappy wid
’er! Don’ split us up!”
“Get out of the way!” barked the sheriff, roughly shoving
her aside.
Bellowing, Kunta sprang forward like a leopard,
pummeling the sheriff to the ground with his fists.
“Save me, Fa!” Kizzy screamed. He grabbed her around
the waist and began pulling frantically at her chain.
When the sheriff’s pistol butt crashed above his ear,
Kunta’s head seemed to explode as he crumpled to his
knees. Bell lunged toward the sheriff, but his outflung arm
threw her off balance, falling heavily as he dumped Kizzy
into the back of his wagon and snapped a lock on her
chain. Leaping nimbly onto the seat, the sheriff lashed the
horse, whose forward jerk sent the wagon lurching as Kunta
clambered up. Dazed, head pounding, ignoring the pistol,
he went scrambling after the wagon as it gathered speed.
“Missy Anne! ... Missy Annnnnnnnnnnne!” Kizzy was
screeching it at the top of her voice. “Missy
Annnnnnnnnnnnnnnnne!” Again and again, the screams

came; they seemed to hang in the air behind the wagon
swiftly rolling toward the main road.
When Kunta began stumbling, gasping for breath, the
wagon was a half mile away; when he halted, for a long
time he stood looking after it until the dust had settled and
the road stretched empty as far as he could see.
The massa turned and walked very quickly with his head
down back into the house, past Bell huddled sobbing by the
bottom step. As if Kunta were sleepwalking, he came
cripping slowly back up the driveway—when an African
remembrance flashed into his mind, and near the front of
the house he bent down and started peering around.
Determining the clearest prints that Kizzy’s bare feet had
left in the dust, scooping up the double handful containing
those footprints, he went rushing toward the cabin: The
ancient forefathers said that precious dust kept in some
safe place would insure Kizzy’s return to where she made
the footprints. He burst through the cabin’s open door, his
eyes sweeping the room and falling upon his gourd on a
shelf containing his pebbles. Springing over there, in the
instant before opening his cupped hands to drop in the dirt,
suddenly he knew the truth: His Kizzy was gone; she would
not return. He would never see his Kizzy again.
His face contorting, Kunta flung his dust toward the
cabin’s roof. Tears bursting from his eyes, snatching his
heavy gourd up high over his head, his mouth wide in a
soundless scream, he hurled the gourd down with all his
strength, and it shattered against the packed-earth floor, his
662 pebbles representing each month of his 55 rains flying
out, ricocheting wildly in all directions.

CHAPTER 84
Weak and dazed, Kizzy lay in the darkness, on some
burlap sacks, in the cabin where she had been pushed
when the mulecart arrived shortly after dusk. She wondered
vaguely what time it was; it seemed that night had gone on
forever. She began tossing and twisting, trying to force
herself to think of something—anything—that didn’t terrify
her. Finally, for the hundredth time, she tried to concentrate
on figuring out how to get “up Nawth,” where she had heard
so often that black people could find freedom if they
escaped. If she went the wrong way, she might wind up
“deep Souf,” where people said massas and overseers
were even worse than Massa Waller. Which was “nawth”?
She didn’t know. I’m going to escape anyway, she swore
bitterly.
It was as if a pin pricked her spine when she heard the
first creaking of the cabin’s door. Springing upright and
backward in the dark, she saw the figure entering furtively,
with a cupped hand shielding a candle’s flame. Above it
she recognized the face of the white man who had
purchased her, and she saw that his other hand was
holding up a short-handled whip, cocked ready for use. But
it was the glazed leer on the white man’s face that froze her
where she stood.
“Rather not have to hurt you none,” he said, the smell of
his liquored breath nearly suffocating her. She sensed his
intent. He wanted to do with her what Pappy did with
Mammy when she heard strange sounds from their
curtained-off room after they thought she was asleep. He
wanted to do what Noah had urged her to do when they had
gone walking down along the fencerow, and which she
almost had given in to, several times, especially the night
before he had left, but he had frightened her too much when
he exclaimed hoarsely, “I wants you wid my baby!” She
thought that this white man must be insane to think that she
was going to permit him to do that with her.

“Ain’t got no time to play with you now!” The white man’s
words were slurred. Kizzy’s eyes were judging how to bolt
past him to flee into the night—but he seemed to read that
impulse, moving a little bit sideways, not taking his gaze off
her as he leaned over and tilted the candle to drain its
melted wax onto the seat of the cabin’s single broken chair;
then the small flame flickered upright. Inching slowly
backward, Kizzy felt her shoulders brushing the cabin’s
wall. “Ain’t you got sense enough to know I’m your new
massa?” He watched her, grimacing some kind of a smile.
“You a fair-lookin’wench. Might even set you free, if I like
you enough—”
When he sprang, seizing Kizzy, she wrenched loose,
shrieking, as with an angry curse he brought the whip
cracking down across the back of her neck. “I’ll take the
hide off you!” Lunging like a wild woman, Kizzy clawed at
his contorted face, but slowly he forced her roughly to the
floor. Pushing back upward, she was shoved down again.
Then the man was on his knees beside her, one of his
hands choking back her screams—“Please, Massa,
please!”—the other stuffing dirty burlap sacking into her
mouth until she gagged. As she flailed her arms in agony
and arched her back to shake him off, he banged her head
against the floor, again, again, again, then began slapping
her—more and more excitedly—until Kizzy felt her dress
being snatched upward, her undergarments being ripped.
Frantically thrashing, the sack in her mouth muffling her
cries, she felt his hands fumbling upward between her
thighs, finding, fingering her private parts, squeezing and
spreading them. Striking her another numbing blow, the
man jerked down his suspenders, made motions at his
trousers’ front. Then came the searing pain as he forced his
way into her, and Kizzy’s senses seemed to explode. On
and on it went, until finally she lost consciousness.
In the early dawn, Kizzy blinked her eyes open. She was
engulfed in shame to find a young black woman bending
over her and sponging her private parts gently with a rag
and warm, soapy water. When Kizzy’s nose told her that
she had also soiled herself, she shut her eyes in

embarrassment, soon feeling the woman cleaning her there
as well. When Kizzy slitted her eyes open again, she saw
that the woman’s face seemed as expressionless as if she
were washing clothes, as if this were but another of the
many tasks she had been called upon to perform in her life.
Finally laying a clean towel over Kizzy’s loins, she glanced
up at Kizzy’s face. “Reckon you ain’t feel like talkin’ none
now,” the woman said quietly, gathering up the dirty rags
and her waterpail, preparing to leave. Clutching these
things in the crook of one arm, she bent again and used her
free hand to draw up a burlap sack to cover most of Kizzy’s
body. “’Fore long, I bring you sump’n to eat—” she said,
and went on out of the cabin door.
Kizzy lay there feeling as if she were suspended in
midair. She tried to deny to herself that the unspeakable,
unthinkable thing had really happened, but the lancing pains
of her torn privates reminded her that it had. She felt a deep
uncleanness, a disgrace that could never be erased. She
tried shifting her position, but the pains seemed to spread.
Holding her body still, she clutched the sack tightly about
her, as if somehow to cocoon herself against any more
outrage, but the pains grew worse.
Kizzy’s mind raced back across the past four days and
nights. She could still see her parents’ terrified faces, still
hear their helpless cries as she was rushed away. She
could still feel herself struggling to escape from the white
trader whom the Spotsylvania County sheriff had turned her
over to; she had nearly slipped free after pleading that she
had to relieve herself. Finally they had reached some small
town where—after long, bitterly angry haggling—the trader
at last had sold her to this new massa, who had awaited the
nightfall to violate her. Mammy! Pappy! If only screaming for
them could reach them—but they didn’t even know where
she was. And who knows what might have happened to
them? She knew that Massa Waller would never sell
anyone he owned “less’n dey breaks his rules.” But in
trying to stop the massa from selling her, they must have
broken a dozen of those rules.
And Noah, what of Noah? Somewhere beaten to death?

Again, it came back to Kizzy vividly, Noah demanding
angrily that to prove her love, she must use her writing
ability to forge a traveling pass for him to show if he should
be seen, stopped, and questioned by patrollers or any
other suspicious whites. She remembered the grim
determination etched on his face as he pledged to her that
once he got up North, with just a little money saved from a
job he would quickly find, “Gwine steal back here an’ slip
you Nawth, too, fo’ de res’ our days togedder.” She sobbed
anew. She knew she would never see him again. Or her
parents. Unless ...
Her thoughts leaped with a sudden hope! Missy Anne
had sworn since girlhood that when she married some
handsome, rich young massa, Kizzy alone must be her
personal maid, later to care for the houseful of children.
Was it possible that when she found out Kizzy was gone
she had gone screaming, ranting, pleading to Massa
Waller? Missy Anne could sway him more than anyone else
on earth! Could the massa have sent out some men
searching for the slave dealer, to learn where he had sold
her, to buy her back?
But soon now a new freshet of grief poured from Kizzy.
She realized that the sheriff knew exactly who the slave
dealer was; they would certainly have traced her by now!
She felt even more desperately lost, even more totally
abandoned. Later, when she had no more tears left to
shed, she lay imploring God to destroy her, if He felt she
deserved all this, just because she loved Noah. Feeling
some slickness seeping between her upper legs, Kizzy
knew that she was continuing to bleed. But the pain had
subsided to a throbbing.
When the cabin’s door came creaking open again, Kizzy
had sprung up and was rearing backward against the wall
before she realized that it was the woman. She was
carrying a steaming small pot, with a bowl and spoon, and
Kizzy slumped back down onto the dirt floor as the woman
put the pot on the table, then spooned some food into the
bowl, which she placed down alongside Kizzy. Kizzy acted
as if she saw neither the food nor the woman, who squatted

beside her and began talking as matter-of-factly as if they
had known each other for years.
“I’se de big-house cook. My name Malizy. What your’n?”
Finally Kizzy felt stupid not to answer. “It Kizzy, Miss
Malizy.”
The woman made an approving grunt. “You sounds wellraised.” She glanced at the untouched stew in the bowl: “I
reckon you know you let vittles git cold dey don’t do you no
good.” Miss Malizy sounded almost like Sister Mandy or
Aunt Sukey.
Hesitantly picking up the spoon, Kizzy tasted the stew,
then began to eat some of it, slowly.
“How ol’ you is?” asked Miss Malizy.
“I’se sixteen, ma’am.”
“Massa boun’ for hell jes’ sho’s he born!” exclaimed Miss
Malizy, half under her breath. Looking at Kizzy, she said,
“Jes’ well’s to tell you massa one dem what loves nigger
womens, ’specially young’uns like you is. He use to mess
wid me, I ain’t but roun’ nine years older’n you, but he quit
after he brung missy here an’ made me de cook, workin’
right dere in de house where she is, thanks be to Gawd!”
Miss Malizy grimaced. “Speck you gwine be seein’ ’im in
here regular.”
Seeing Kizzy’s hand fly to her mouth, Miss Malizy said,
“Honey, you jes’ well’s realize you’s a nigger woman. De
kind of white man massa is, you either gives in, or he gwine
make you wish you had, one way or ’nother. An’ lemme tell
you, dis massa a mean thing if you cross ’im. Fact, ain’t
never knowed nobody git mad de way he do. Ever’thing
can be gwine ’long jes’ fine, den let jes’ anythin’ happen dat
rile ’im,” Miss Malizy snapped her fingers, “quick as dat he
can fly red hot an’ ack like he done gone crazy!”
Kizzy’s thoughts were racing. Once darkness fell, before
he came again, she must escape. But it was as if Miss
Malizy read her mind. “Don’t you even start thinkin’ ’bout
runnin’ nowhere, honey! He jes’ have you hunted down wid
dem blood dogs, an’ you in a worser mess. Jes’ calm
yo’self. De next fo’, five days he ain’t gon’ be here nohow.
Him an’ his ol’ nigger chicken trainer already done left for

one dem big chicken fights halfway crost de state.” Miss
Malizy paused. “Massa don’t care ’bout nothin’ much as
dem fightin’ chickens o’ his’n.”
She went on talking nonstop—about how the massa, who
had grown to adulthood as a po’ cracker, bought a twentyfive-cent raffle ticket that won him a good fighting rooster,
which got him started on the road to becoming one of the
area’s more successful gamecock owners.
Kizzy finally interrupted. “Don’t he sleep wid his missis?”
“Sho’ he do!” said Miss Malizy. “He jes’ love womens.
You won’t never see much o’ her ’cause she scairt to death
o’ ’im, an’ she keep real quiet an’ stay close. She whole lot
younger’n he is, she was jes’ fo’teen, same kind of po’
cracker he was, when he married ’er an’ brung ’er here. But
she done foun’ out he don’t care much for her as he do his
chickens—” As Miss Malizy continued talking about the
massa, his wife, and his chickens, Kizzy’s thoughts drifted
away once again to thoughts of escape.
“Gal! Is you payin’ me ’tention?”
“Yes’m,” she replied quickly. Miss Malizy’s frown eased.
“Well, I specks you better, since I’se ’quaintin’ you wid
where you is!”
Briefly she studied Kizzy. “Where you come from,
anyhow?” Kizzy said from Spotsylvania County, Virginia.
“Ain’t never heared of it! Anyhow, dis here’s Caswell
County in North Ca’liny.” Kizzy’s expression showed that
she had no idea where that was, though she had often
heard of North Carolina, and she had the impression that it
was somewhere near Virginia.
“Looka here, does you even know massa’s name?”
asked Miss Malizy. Kizzy looked blank. “Him’s Massa Tom
Lea—” She reflected a moment. “Reckon now dat make
you Kizzy Lea.”
“My name Kizzy Waller!” Kizzy exclaimed in protest.
Then, with a flash, she remembered that all of this had
happened to her at the hands of Massa Waller, whose
name she bore, and she began weeping. “Don’t take on so,
honey!” exclaimed Miss Malizy. “You sho’ knows niggers
takes whoever’s dey massa’s name. Nigger names don’t

make no difference nohow, jes’ sump’n to call’ em—”
Kizzy said, “My pappy real name Kunta Kinte. He a
African.”
“You don’t say!” Miss Malizy appeared taken aback. “I’se
heared my great-gran’daddy was one dem Africans, too.
My mammy say her mammy told her he was blacker’n tar,
wid scars zigzaggin’ down both cheeks. But my mammy
never said his name—” Miss Malizy paused. “You know yo’
mammy, too?”
“’Cose I does. My mammy name Bell. She a big-house
cook like you is. An’ my pappy drive de massa’s buggy—
leas’ he did.”
“You jes’ come from bein’ wid yo’ mammy an’ pappy
both?” Miss Malizy couldn’t believe it. “Lawd, ain’t many us
gits to know both our folks fo’ somebody git sol’ away!”
Sensing that Miss Malizy was preparing to leave,
suddenly dreading being left alone again, Kizzy sought a
way to extend the conversation. “You talks a whole lot like
my mammy,” she offered. Miss Malizy seemed startled,
then very pleased. “I specks she a good Christian woman
like I is.” Hesitantly, Kizzy asked something that had
crossed her mind. “What kin’ of work dey gwine have me
doin’ here, Miss Malizy?”
Miss Malizy seemed astounded at the question. “What
you gon’ do?” she demanded. “Massa ain’t tol’ you how
many niggers here?” Kizzy shook her head. “Honeychile,
you makin’ zactly five! An’ dat’s countin’ Mingo, de ol’
nigger dat live down ’mongst de chickens. So it’s me
cookin’, washin’, an’ housekeepin’, an’ Sister Sarah an’
Uncle Pompey workin’ in de fiel’, where you sho’ gwine go
too—dat you is!”
Miss Malizy’s brows lifted at the dismay on Kizzy’s face.
“What work you done where you was?”
“Cleanin’ in de big house, an’ helpin’ my mammy in de
kitchen,” Kizzy answered in a faltering voice.
“Figgered sump’n like dat when I seen dem soft hands of
your’n! Well, you sho’ better git ready for some callouses
an’ corns soon’s massa git back!” Miss Malizy then
seemed to feel that she should soften a bit. “Po’ thing!

Listen here to me, you been used to one dem rich massa’s
places. But dis here one dem po’ crackers what scrabbled
an’ scraped till he got holt a l’il lan’ an’ built a house dat
ain’t nothin’ but a big front to make ’em look better off dan
dey is. Plenty crackers like dat roun’ here. Dey got a sayin’,
‘Farm a hunnud acres wid fo’ niggers.’ Well, he too tight to
buy even dat many. ’Cose, he ain’t got but eighty-some
acres, an’ farmin’ jes’ ’nough of dat to lay claim to bein’ a
massa. His big thing is his hunnud an’ some fightin’
chickens dat Mingo nigger helpin’ him raise an’ train to bet
on in fights. Only thing massa spen’ any money on is dem
chickens. He always swearin’ to missy one day dem
chickens gwine see ’em rich. He git drunk an’ tell ’er one
dese days he gwine buil’ her a house so big it have six
columns crost de front, an’ be two stories tall, an’ even
finer’n de houses o’ dese real rich massas hereabouts
what snubs ’em so bad, like dey still de po’ crackers dey
started out! Fact, massa claim he savin’ up for de day he
buil’ dat fine house. Hmph! Might, for all I know. I know he
too tight even to have a stableboy, let alone a nigger to
drive ’im places like near ’bout all massas has. He hitch up
his own buggy an’ wagon both, saddle his own hoss, an’ he
drive hisself. Honey, de only reason I ain’t out in de fiel’ is
missis can’t hardly cook water, an’ he love to eat. ’Sides
dat, he likes de looks of havin’ a house servin’ nigger for
when dey guests come. When he git to drinkin’ out
somewhere, he love ’vitin’ in guests for dinner, tryin’ to put
on de dog, an’ ’specially if he been winnin’ pretty good,
bettin’ on his roosters at dem cockfights. But anyhow, he
finally had to see wasn’t no way jes’ Uncle Pompey an’
Sister Sarah could farm much as he like to plant, an’ he
had to git somebody else. Dat’s how come he bought you
—” Miss Malizy paused. “You know how much you cost?”
Kizzy said weakly, “No’m.”
“Well, I reckon six to seb’n hundred dollars, considerin’
de prices I’se heard him say niggers costin’ nowdays, an’
you bein’ strong an young, lookin’ like a good breeder, too,
dat’ll bring ’im free pickaninnies.”
With Kizzy again speechless, Miss Malizy moved closer

to the door and stopped. “Fact, I wouldn’t o’ been surprised
if massa stuck you in wid one dem stud niggers some rich
massas keeps on dey places an’ hires out. But it look like
to me he figgerin’ on breedin’ you hisself.”

CHAPTER 85
The conversation was short.
“Massa, I gwine have a baby.”
“Well, what you expectin’ me to do about it? I know you
better not start playin’ sick, tryin’ to get out of workin’!”
But he did start coming to Kizzy’s cabin less often as her
belly began to grow. Slaving out under the hot sun, Kizzy
went through dizzy spells as well as morning sickness in the
course of her painful initiation to fieldwork. Torturous
blisters on both her palms would burst, fill with fluid again,
then burst again from their steady friction against the rough,
heavy handle of her hoe. Chopping along, trying to keep not
too far behind the experienced, short, stout, black Uncle
Pompey, and the wiry, light-brown-skinned Sister Sarah—
both of whom she felt were still deciding what to think of her
—she would strain to recall everything she had ever heard
her mammy say about the having of young’uns. She felt
she’d give anything if Bell could be here beside her now.
Despite her humiliation at being great with child and having
to face her mammy—who had warned repeatedly of the
disgrace that could befall her “if’n you keeps messin’ roun’
wid dat Noah an’ winds up too close”—Kizzy knew she’d
understand that it hadn’t been her fault, and she’d let her
know the things she needed to know.
She could almost hear Bell’s voice telling her sadly, as
she had so often, what she believed had caused the tragic
deaths of both the wife and baby of Massa Waller: “Po’ l’il
thing was jes’ built too small to birth, dat great big baby!”
Was she herself built big enough? Kizzy wondered
frantically. Was there any way to tell? She remembered
once when she and Missy Anne had stood goggle-eyed,
watching a cow deliver a calf, then their whispering that
despite what grown-ups told them about storks bringing
babies, maybe mothers had to squeeze them out through
their privates in the same gruesome way.
The older women, Miss Malizy and Sister Sarah,

seemed to take hardly any notice of her steadily enlarging
belly—and breasts—so Kizzy decided angrily that it would
be as big a waste of time to confide her fears to them as it
would to Massa Lea. Certainly he couldn’t have been less
concerned as he rode around the plantation on his horse,
yelling threats at anyone he felt wasn’t working fast enough.
When the baby came—in the winter of 1806—Sister
Sarah served as the midwife. After what seemed an
eternity of moaning, screaming, feeling as if she were
ripping apart, Kizzy lay bathed in sweat, staring in wonder
at the wriggling infant grinning Sister Sarah was holding up.
It was a boy—but his skin seemed to be almost high-yaller.
Seeing Kizzy’s alarm, Sister Sarah assured her, “New
babies takes leas’ a month to darken to dey full color,
honey!” But Kizzy’s apprehension deepened as she
examined her baby several times every day; when a full
month passed, she knew that the child’s permanent color
was going to be at best a pecan-colored brown.
She remembered her mammy’s proud boast, “Ain’t
nothin’ but black niggers here on massa’s place.” And she
tried not to think about “sasso-borro,” the name her ebonyblack father—his mouth curled in scorn—used to call those
with mulatto skin. She was grateful that they weren’t there to
see—and share—her shame. But she knew that she’d
never be able to hold her head up again even if they never
saw the child, for all anyone had to do was compare her
color and the baby’s to know what had happened—and
with whom. She thought of Noah and felt even more
ashamed. “Dis our las’ chance fo’ I leaves, baby, how come
you can’t?” she heard him say again. She wished
desperately that she had, that this was Noah’s baby; at
least it would be black.
“Gal, what’s de matter you ain’t happy, great big ol’ fine
chile like dat!” said Miss Malizy one morning, noticing how
sad Kizzy looked and how awkwardly she was holding the
baby, almost at her side, as if she found it hard even to look
at her child. In a rush of understanding, Miss Malizy blurted,
“Honey, what you lettin’ bother you ain’t no need to worry
’bout. Don’t make no difference,’cause des days an’ times

don’t nobody care, ain’t even pay no ’tention. It gittin’ to be
near ’bout many mulattoes as it is black niggers like us. It’s
jes’ de way things is, dat’s all—” Miss Malizy’s eyes were
pleading with Kizzy. “An’ you can be sho’ massa ain’t never
gwine claim de chile, not no way atall. He jes’ see a
young’un he glad he ain’t had to pay for, dat he gwine stick
out in de fields same as you is. So de only thing for you to
feel is dat big, fine baby’s your’n, honey—dat’s all it is to it!”
That way of seeing things helped Kizzy to collect herself,
at least somewhat. “But what gwine happen,” she asked,
“when sometime or ’nother missis sho’ catch sight dis chile,
Miss Malizy?”
“She know he ain’t no good! I wisht I had a penny for
every white woman knows dey husbands got chilluns by
niggers. Main thing, I speck missis be jealous ’cause seem
like she ain’t able to have none.”
The next night Massa Lea came to the cabin—about a
month after the baby was born—he bent over the bed and
held his candle close to the face of the sleeping baby.
“Hmmmm. Ain’t bad-looking. Good-sized, too.” With his
forefinger, he jiggled one of the clenched, tiny fists and
said, turning to Kizzy, “All right. This weekend will make
enough time off. Monday you go back to the field.”
“But Massa, I ought to stay to nuss ’im!” she said
foolishly.
His rage exploded in her ears. “Shut up and do as you’re
told! You’re through being pampered by some fancy
Virginia blueblood! Take that pickaninny with you to the
field, or I’ll keep that baby and sell you out of here so quick
your head swims!”
Scared silly, Kizzy burst into weeping at even the thought
of being sold away from her child. “Yassuh, Massa!” she
cried, cringing. Seeing her crushed submission, his anger
quickly abated, but then Kizzy began to sense—with
disbelief—that he had actually come intending to use her
again, even now, with the baby sleeping right beside them.
“Massa, Massa, it too soon,” she pleaded tearfully. “I ain’t
healed up right yet, Massa!” But when he simply ignored
her, she struggled only long enough to put out the candle,

after which she endured the ordeal quietly, terrified that the
baby would awaken. She was relieved that he still seemed
to be sleeping even when the massa spent himself, and
then was clambering up, preparing to go. In the darkness,
as he snapped his suspenders onto his shoulders, he said,
“Well, got to call him something—” Kizzy lay with her breath
sucked in. After another moment, he said, “Call him George
—that’s after the hardest-working nigger I ever saw.” After
another pause, the massa continued, as if talking to
himself, “George. Yeah. To-morrow I’ll write it in my Bible.
Yeah, that’s a good name—George!” And he went on out.
Kizzy cleaned herself off and then lay back down, unsure
which outrage to be most furious about. She had thought
earlier of either “Kunta” or “Kinte” as ideal names, though
uncertain of what the massa’s reaction might be to their
uncommon sounds. But she dared not risk igniting his
temper with any objection to the name he’d chosen. She
thought with a new horror of what her African pappy would
think of it, knowing what importance he attached to names.
Kizzy remembered how her pappy had told her that in his
homeland, the naming of sons was the most important thing
of all, “ ’cause de sons becomes dey families’ mens!”
She lay thinking of how she had never understood why
her pappy had always felt so bitter against the world of
white people—“toubob” was his word for them. She thought
of Bell’s saying to her, “You’s so lucky it scare me, chile,
’cause you don’ really know what bein’ a nigger is, an’ I
hopes to de good Lawd you don’ never have to fin’ out.”
Well, she had found out—and there seemed no limit to the
anguish whites were capable of wreaking upon black
people. But the worst thing they did, Kunta had said, was to
keep them ignorant of who they are, to keep them from
being fully human.
“De reason yo’ pappy took holt of my feelin’s from de
firs’,” her mammy had told her, “was he de proudest black
man I ever seed!” Before she fell asleep, Kizzy decided that
however base her baby’s origins, however light his color,
whatever name the massa forced upon him, she would
never regard him as other than the grandson of an African.

CHAPTER 86
Since Uncle Pompey had never said much beyond “How
do?” to Kizzy when he saw her in the mornings, she was
surprised and deeply touched when she arrived in the field
with her baby on her first day back at work. Uncle Pompey
approached her shyly and, touching the brim of his sweatstained straw hat, pointed toward the trees at the edge of
the field. “Figgered you could put de baby under dere,” he
said. Not sure what he meant, Kizzy squinted and saw
something beneath one of the trees. Her eyes were soon
glistening with tears, for when she walked over to it, she
saw that it was a little lean-to, its top thatched with freshly
cut long grass, thick-stemmed weeds, and green leaves.
Gratefully Kizzy spread her clean crocus sack upon the
sheltered leafy cushion and laid the baby on it. He cried
briefly, but with her comforting sounds and pats, soon he
was gurgling and inspecting his fingers. Rejoining her two
companions, who were working in the tobacco, she said,
“Sho’ ’preciates dat, Uncle Pompey.” He grunted and
chopped faster, trying to conceal his embarrassment. At
intervals Kizzy would hurry over and check on her baby, and
about every three hours, when it began crying, she would sit
down and let it nurse at one of her breasts, which were taut
with milk.
“Yo’ baby jes’ perkin’ us all up, ’cause sho’ ain’t nothin’
else roun’ here to pay no ’tention,” Sister Sarah said a few
days later, addressing Kizzy but casting a sly eye at Uncle
Pompey, whose return look was as if at some persistent
mosquito. By now, when each workday ended with the
setting sun, Sister Sarah insisted on carrying the baby as
Kizzy took their two hoes for the tired trudge back to slave
row, which was nothing more than four small boxlike, onewin-dowed cabins near a large chinquapin tree. Usually, the
early darkness would have fallen by the time Kizzy hurriedly
lighted sticks in her small fireplace to cook something from
her remaining rations, which were issued each Saturday

morning by Massa Lea. Eating quickly, she would lie down
on her cornshuck mattress, playing with George but not
nursing him until hunger made him start bawling. Then,
encouraging him to drink to his fullest, she would hold him
over her shoulder, rubbing his back to help him burp, and
then she would play with him again. She kept them both
awake as late as she could, wanting the baby to sleep as
long as possible before he would awaken for his next night
feeding. It was during this interim that—twice or three times
weekly—the massa would come to force himself upon her.
He would always smell of liquor, but she had decided—for
the sake of the baby as well as her own—not to try resisting
him anymore. Filled with loathing, she would lie cold and
still, with her legs apart, as he took of her his grunting
pleasure. When it ended and he got up, she would keep
lying there with her eyes closed—hearing the dime or
sometimes the quarter that he would always drop on her
table—until he left. Kizzy would wonder if the missis, too,
was lying awake in the big house, which was close enough
to be within earshot; what must she think, how must she
feel, when the massa came to their bed still smelling of
another woman?
Finally, after nursing George twice again before
daybreak, she fell into a deep sleep—just in time to be
roused by Uncle Pompey knocking at the door to wake her
up. Kizzy ate breakfast and nursed the baby again before
Sister Sarah arrived to carry him out to one of the fields.
There was a separate field for corn, tobacco, and cotton,
and Uncle Pompey had by now constructed a little treeshaded shelter at the edge of each one.
When the massa and missis finished their midday meal
on Sunday, they always left soon after for their weekly
buggy ride, and while they were gone, slave row’s handful
of folk would gather round the chinquapin tree for an hour of
visiting. Now that Kizzy and her son had joined them, Miss
Malizy and Sister Sarah would promptly begin their tug-ofwar over who would get to hold the restless George. Uncle
Pompey, who sat puffing his pipe, seemed to enjoy talking
to Kizzy, perhaps because she’d listen to him with far fewer

interruptions and far more respect than the two older
women would.
“Dis place weren’t nothin’ but jes’ woods worth ’bout fifty
cents a acre,” said Pompey one afternoon, “when massa
got his firs’ thirty acres an’ his firs’ nigger name George,
same as yo’ young’un here. He jes’ plain worked dat nigger
to death.” Seeing Kizzy gasp, Uncle Pompey halted.
“Sump’n de matter?” he asked.
“Nawsuh, nothin’!” Kizzy quickly collected herself, and
Uncle Pompey continued.
“When I come here, massa’d done had dat po’ nigger a
year, cut-tin’ trees, gougin’ up stumps, clearin’ brush
enough to plow an’ plant to make his first crop. Den one
day me an’ dat nigger was sawin’ logs into de very planks
in dat big house yonder.” Uncle Pompey pointed. “Lawd, I
heard dis ’culiar sound an’ glanced up from my end o’ de
saw. Dis George nigger’s eyes was rollin’, he grab at his
chest, an’ drop down dead—jes’ like dat.”
Kizzy changed the subject. “Every since I come here,
been hearin’ y’all go on ’bout fightin’ chickens. Ain’t hardly
heared ’bout none befo’—”
“Well, I’se sho’ heared massa say dey fights a-plenty o’
’em in dat Virginia,” said Miss Malizy. “Reckon it jes’ wasn’t
nowhere close where you was at.”
“Don’t none us know no whole lot ’bout ’em here, neither,”
said Uncle Pompey. “ ’ceptin’ dey’s jes’ some special kin’
of roosters born an’ bred to kill one ’nother, an’ mens
gambles whole lots of money on ’em.”
Sister Sarah chimed in. “Onliest somebody could tell you
mo’’bout ’em is dat ol’ Mingo nigger what live down dere
wid dem chickens.”
Seeing Kizzy’s open-mouthed surprise, Miss Malizy
exclaimed, “Done tol’ you dat firs’ day you got here. You
jes’ ain’t seed ’im yet.” She laughed. “And you might not
never see ’im!”
“I been here fo’teen years,” said Sister Sarah, “an’ I ain’t
seed dat nigger mo’n eight, ten times! He jes’ ruther be
’mongst chickens dan peoples! Hmph!” she snorted. “Fact,
I specks his mammy hatched him!”

While Kizzy joined in the laughter, Sister Sarah leaned
toward Miss Malizy, her arms outstretched. “Here, lemme
hol’ dat chile awhile.” Grudgingly, Miss Malizy relinquished
the baby.
“Well, anyhow,” she said, “dem chickens sho’ took
massa an’ missis from bein’ raggedy to ridin’ roun’ here
puttin’ on sich big airs now.” She made a mimicking grand
gesture. “Dat’s massa throwin’ up his hand when dey buggy
passin’ some rich massas’ carriages!” Her finger
resembled a butterfly in motion. “Dat’s missis’ handkerchief
a-flutterin’ ’til she ’bout to fall out’n de buggy!”
Amid the loud guffawing, Miss Malizy needed a while to
recover herself. Then, as she reached out to take the baby
back, Sister Sarah snapped, “You wait! I ain’t had ’im but a
minute!”
It delighted Kizzy to see them compete over her child,
and to watch Uncle Pompey watching quietly, then beaming
instantly if the baby happened to look his way, when he
would make funny faces or movements with his fingers to
hold the child’s attention. George was crawling around one
Sunday a few months later when he started crying to nurse.
Kizzy was about to lift him when Miss Malizy said, “Let ’im
hol’ on jes’ a bit, honey. Dat boy big enough to start eatin’
sump’n now.” Hurrying to her cabin, Miss Malizy returned in
a few moments, and they all watched as she used the back
of a teaspoon to mash a half teacup of cornbread and
potlikker into a mush. Then, lifting George onto her ample
lap, she spooned a tiny portion into his mouth. They all
beamed as he wolfed it down and smacked his lips in
eagerness for more.
With George now starting to explore on all fours when
they were out in the fields, Kizzy tied a length of small rope
about his waist to limit his range, but she soon discovered
that even within its reach, he was picking up and eating dirt
and crawling insects. They all agreed that something had to
be done. “Since he ain’ got to nuss no mo’,” Miss Malizy
suggested, “seem like if you leaves’im wid me, I can keep
a good eye on ’im whilst you’s in de fiel’.” Even Sister
Sarah thought that made sense, and as much as Kizzy

hated to, she began delivering George to the big-house
kitchen before she left each morning, then retrieving him
when she returned. She almost wavered about her decision
when George’s first recognizable word was “Mi’lize,” but
soon after he clearly said “Mammy,” thrilling Kizzy to the
core. Then his next word was “Unka’pomp,” which made
the old man look like he’d swallowed the sunshine. And that
was soon followed by “Sis’sira.”
At one year, George was walking without assistance. By
fifteen months he was even romping about, clearly reveling
in the sheer joy of being at last independent and on his
own. Now he seldom permitted any of them to hold him,
unless he was sleepy or didn’t feel well, which was rare, for
he was fairly bursting with health and growth, thanks in no
small part to his daily stuffing by Miss Malizy with the best
fare that the kitchen could afford. Now during Sunday
afternoons, as Kizzy and the other three doting adults
carried on their conversation, they feasted their eyes on the
boy waddling around, playing happily alone, with his soon
baggy-wet diapers shortly matching the dirt in color.
George was as delighted with tasting a twig as with
catching a beetle or with chasing a dragonfly, the yard cat,
or the chickens—which he sent clucking off in alarm to find
another scratching place. One Sunday the three women
held their sides in laughter at the spectacle of the usually
somber Uncle Pompey loping awkwardly for short
distances trying to get a light breeze to lift the kite he had
made for the fascinated boy. “Lem’me tell you, gal, you
don’t really know what you seein’ yonder,” Sister Sarah
remarked to Kizzy. “Fo’ dat chile come here, once Pompey
got in his cabin, we wouldn’t hardly see ’im no mo’ ’til de
mornin’.”
“De truth!” said Miss Malizy. “I ain’t even knowed
Pompey had no fun in ’im!”
“Well, I know I sho’ felt good when he put up dem l’il
shelters for George when I first brung ’im to de fiel’s,” said
Kizzy.
“You feel good! Dat chile doin’ us all good!” said Sister
Sarah.

Uncle Pompey further claimed George’s attention when
he began telling him stories at the age of two. With the
Sunday sun setting and the evening turning cool, Pompey
would build a small, smoky fire of green wood to
discourage the mosquitoes as the three women would
position their chairs around the fire. Then George would
find his most comfortable position to watch the mobile face
and gesturing hands of Uncle Pompey as he told of “Br’er
Rabbit” and “Br’er Bear,” in time drawing upon such a
seeming endless wealth of tales that once Sister Sarah
was moved to exclaim, “Ain’t never dreamt you knowed all
dem stories!” Uncle Pompey gave her a cryptic glance and
said, “Whole heap o’ things’bout me you don’t know.”
Sister Sarah, flouncing her head, affected great disgust.
“Hmph! Sho’ ain’t nobody tryin’ to fin’ out!” Uncle Pompey
puffed solemnly at his pipe, his crinkled eyes laughing.
“Miss Malizy, I gwine say sump’n to you,” Kizzy declared
one day. “Sister Sarah an’ Uncle Pompey always carryin’
on like dey gits on each other’s nerves. But sometimes I
gits de feelin’ it’s sump’n like dey way of courtin’ one
’nother—”
“Chile, I don’t know. I know neither of ’em wouldn’t never
say if it was. But I speck dey jes’ makin’ some fun to pass
de time, ’dat’s all. You git ol’ as we is an’ ain’t got yo’self
nobody, you done jes’ got used to it, since seem like ain’t
nothin’ you can do ’bout it nohow.” Miss Malizy’s eyes
searched Kizzy before she went on. “We’s ol’, an’ dat’s dat,
but bein’ young like you, honey, an’ ain’t got nobody, dat’s
different! I’se jes’ wished massa’d buy somebody dat y’all
could jes’ kin’ of nachel git together!”
“Yes’m, Miss Malizy, ain’t no need me actin’ like I don’t
think’bout it, neither, ’cause I sho do.” Kizzy paused. She
then said what she was certain they both knew. “But massa
ain’t gwine do dat.” She felt a flash of appreciation that
none of them had ever mentioned, or even hinted at, what
they all must know still went on between her and the massa;
at least they never mentioned it in her presence. “Since
we’s talkin’ close,” she went on, “it was a man I knowed
where I come from. I still thinks ’bout him a-plenty. We was

gwine git married, but den everything got messed up. Fact,
dat’s how come I got here.”
Forcing more brightness into her tone, sensing Miss
Malizy’s genuinely affectionate concern, Kizzy told her how
it had been with Noah, ending finally, “I tells myself he jes’
steady gwine ’bout lookin’ fo’ me, an’ we’s gwine turn up
face-to-face somewhere one dese days.” Kizzy’s
expression might have been of someone praying. “If dat
was to happen, Miss Malizy, I tell you de truth, I b’lieve
neither one us would say nary word. I b’lieve we jes’ take
one’nother’s hand an’ I slip on in here and tell y’all goodbye, an’ git George, an’ we leave. I wouldn’t even ax or care
whereabouts. Ain’t never gwine forgit de las’ thing he said
to me. He say, ‘We spen’ de res’ our days togedder,
baby!’” Kizzy’s voice broke and then both she and Miss
Malizy were weeping, and soon afterward Kizzy went back
to her cabin.
One Sunday morning, a few weeks later, George was in
the big house “helping” Miss Malizy prepare the noon meal
when Sister Sarah invited Kizzy into her cabin for the first
time since she had come to the Lea plantation. Kizzy
stared at the much-chinked walls; they were all but covered
with bunches of dried roots and herbs hanging from pegs
and nails, attesting to Sister Sarah’s claim that she could
supply the nature cure for nearly any ailment. Pointing to her
only chair, she said, “Set yo’self down, gal.” Kizzy sat, and
Sister Sarah went on, “I gwine tell you sump’n ever’body
don’t know. My mammy was a Louisiana Cajun woman
what teached me how to tell fortunes good.” She studied
Kizzy’s startled face. “You want me to tell your’n?”
Instantly Kizzy remembered times when both Uncle
Pompey and Miss Malizy had mentioned that Sister Sarah
had a gift for fortune-telling. Kizzy heard herself saying, “I
reckon I would, Sister Sarah.”
Squatting on the floor, Sister Sarah drew a large box
from under the bed. Removing from it a smaller box, she
picked out two palmfuls of mysterious-looking dried objects
and slowly turned toward Kizzy. Carefully arranging her
objects into a symmetrical design, she produced a thin,

wandlike stick from within the bosom of her dress and
began vigorously stirring them around. Bending forward
until her forehead actually touched the objects on the floor,
she seemed to be straining to straighten back upward
when she spoke in an unnaturally high tone, “I hates to tell
you what de sperrits says. You ain’t never gwine see yo’
mammy an’ yo’ pappy no mo’, leas’ways not in dis worl’—”
Kizzy burst into sobs. Ignoring her entirely, Sister Sarah
carefully rearranged her objects, then stirred and stirred
again, much longer than before, until Kizzy regained some
control and her weeping had diminished. Through misty
eyes, she stared in awe as the wand trembled and
quivered. Then Sister Sarah began a mumbling that was
barely audible: “Look like jes’ ain’t dis chile’s good-luck
time ... onlies’ man she gwine ever love ... he had a mighty
hard road ... an’ he love her, too ... but de sperrits done tol’
’im it’s de bes’ to know de truth ... an’ to give up jes’ even
hopin’.... ”
Kizzy sprang upright, shrieking, this time highly agitating
Sister Sarah. “Shhhhh! Shhhhh! Shhhhh! Don’t ’sturb de
sperrits, daughter! SHHHHH! SHHHHH! SHHHHH!” But
Kizzy continued to scream, bolting outside and across into
her own cabin and slamming her door, as Uncle Pompey’s
cabin door jerked open and the faces of Massa and Missis
Lea, Miss Malizy, and George appeared abruptly at
windows of the big house and its kitchen. Kizzy was
thrashing and wailing on her cornshuck mattress when
George came bursting in. “Mammy! Mammy! What de
matter?” Her face tear-streaked and contorted, she
screamed hysterically at him, “SHUT UP!”

CHAPTER 87
By George’s third year, he had begun to demonstrate a
determination to “help” the slave-row grown-ups. “Lawd,
tryin’ to carry some water for me, an’ can’t hardly lif’ up de
bucket!” Miss Malizy said laughing. And another time: “Dog
if he ain’t toted a stick at a time ’til he fill up my woodbox;
den he raked de ashes out’n de fireplace!” Proud as Kizzy
was, she took pains not to repeat Miss Malizy’s praises to
George, whom she felt was giving her headaches enough
already.
“How come I ain’t black like you is, Mammy?” he asked
one night when they were alone in the cabin, and gulping,
Kizzy said, “Peoples jes’ born what color dey is, dat’s all.”
But not many nights passed before he raised the subject
again. “Mammy, who my pappy was? Why ain’t I never
seed ’im? Where he at?” Kizzy affected a threatening tone:
“Jes’ shut yo’ mouth up!” But hours later, she lay awake
beside him, still seeing his hurt, confused expression, and
the next morning delivering him to Miss Malizy, she
apologized in a lame way. “I jes’ gits frazzled, you ax me so
many questions.”
But she knew that something better than that had to be
told to her highly alert, inquisitive son, something that he
both could understand and would accept. “He tall, an’ black
as de night, an’ didn’t hardly never smile,” she offered
finally. “He b’longst to you same as me, ’cept you calls him
Gran’pappy!” George seemed interested and curious to
hear more. Telling him that his gran’pappy had come on a
ship from Africa “to a place my mammy said dey calls
’Naplis,’” she said that a brother of her Massa Waller had
brought him to a plantation in Spotsylvania County, but he
tried to escape. Uncertain how to soften the next part of the
story, she decided to make it brief: “—an’ when he kept on
runnin’ ’way, dey chopped off half his foot.”
A grimace twisted George’s small face. “How come dey
done dat, Mammy?”

“He near ’bout kilt some nigger catchers.”
“Catchin’ niggers fo’ what?”
“Well, niggers dat had runned ’way.”
“What dey was runnin’ from?”
“From dey white massas.”
“What de white massas done to ’em?”
In frustration, she shrilled, “Heish yo’ mouf! Git on ’way
from me, worryin’ me to death!”
But George never was silenced for long, any more than
his appetite to know more of his African gran’pappy ever
was fully satisfied. “Where ’bouts is dat Africa, Mammy?” ...
“Any l’il boys in dat Africa?”... “What my gran’pappy’s name
was again?”
Even beyond what she had hoped, George seemed to
be building up his own image of his gran’pappy, and—to
the limits of her endurance—Kizzy tried to help it along with
tales from her own rich store of memories. “Boy, I wish you
could o’ heared ’im singin’ some o’ dem African songs to
me when we be ridin’ in de massa’s buggy, an’ I was a l’il
gal, right roun’ de age you is now.” Kizzy would find herself
smiling as she remembered with what delight she used to
sit on the high, narrow buggy seat alongside her pappy as
they went rolling along the hot, dusty Spotsylvania County
roads; how at other times she and Kunta would walk handin-hand along the fencerow that led to the stream where
later she would walk hand-in-hand with Noah. She said to
George, “Yo’ gran’pappy like to tell me things in de African
tongue. Like he call a fiddle a ko, or he call a river Kamby
Bolongo, whole lotsa different, funny-soundin’ words like
dat.” She thought how much it would please her pappy,
wherever he was, for his grandson also to know the African
words.
“Ko!” she said sharply. “Can you say dat?”
“Ko,” said George.
“All right, you so smart: ‘Kamby Bolongo’!” George
repeated it perfectly the first time. Sensing that she didn’t
intend to continue, he demanded, “Say me some mo’,
Mammy!” Overwhelmed with love for him, Kizzy promised
him more—later on—and then she put him, protesting, to

bed.

CHAPTER 88
When George’s sixth year came—meaning that he must
start working in the fields—Miss Malizy was heartsick to
lose his company in the kitchen, but Kizzy and Sister Sarah
rejoiced to be getting him back at last. From George’s first
day of fieldwork, he seemed to relish it as a new realm of
adventure, and their loving eyes followed him as he ran
around picking up rocks that might break the point of Uncle
Pompey’s oncoming plow. He scurried about bringing to
each of them a bucket of cool drinking water that he had
trudged to get from the spring at the other end of the field.
He even “helped” them with the corn and cotton planting,
dropping at least some of the seeds more or less where
they should have gone along the mounded rows. When the
three grown-ups laughed at his clumsy but determined
efforts to wield a hoe whose handle was longer than he
was, George’s own broad smile displayed his
characteristic good spirits. They had a further laugh when
George insisted to Uncle Pompey that he could plow, and
then discovered that he wasn’t tall enough to hold the
plowhandles; but he promptly wrapped his arms around the
sides and hollered to the mule, “Git up!”
When they finally got back into their cabin in the late
evenings, Kizzy immediately began the next chore of
cooking them a meal, as hungry as she knew George must
be. But one night he proposed that the routine be changed.
“Mammy, you done worked hard all day. How come you
don’t lay down an’ res’ some fo’ you cooks?” He would
even try to order her around if she felt like letting him get
away with it. At times it seemed to Kizzy as if her son was
trying to fill in for a man whom she felt he sensed was
missing in both of their lives. George was so independent
and self-sufficient for a small boy that now or then when he
got a cold or some small injury, Sister Sarah would insist
upon all but smothering him with her herb cures, and Kizzy
would finish the job with a plentiful salving of her love.

Sometimes, as they both lay before sleeping, he would set
Kizzy smiling to herself with the fantasies he’d share with
her there in the darkness. “I’se gwine down dis big road,”
he whispered one night, “an’ I looks up, an’ I sees dis great
big ol’ bear a-runnin’ ... seem like he taller’n a hoss ... an’ I
hollers, ‘Mr. Bear! Hey, Mr. Bear! You jes’ well’s to git
ready for me to turn you inside out, ’cause you sho’ ain’t
gwine hurt my mammy!’” Or sometimes he would urge and
urge and finally persuade his tired mammy to join him in
singing some of the songs that he had heard Miss Malizy
sing when he had spent his days with her in the big-house
kitchen. And the little cabin would resound softly with their
duets: “Oh, Mary, don’t ’cha weep, don’t ’cha moan! Oh,
Mary, don’t ’cha weep, don’t ’cha moan! ’Cause ol’
Pharaoh’s army done got drown-ded! Oh, Mary, don’t ’cha
weep!”
Sometimes when nothing else attracted George within
the cabin, the restless six-year-old would stretch out before
the fireplace. Whittling a finger-sized stick to a point at one
end, which he then charred in the flames to make a sort of
pencil, he would then draw on a piece of white pine board
the simple outline figures of people or animals. Every time
he did it, Kizzy all but held her breath, fearing that George
would next want to learn to write or read. But apparently the
idea never occurred to him, and Kizzy took great care
never to mention writing or reading, which she felt had
forever scarred her life. In fact, during all of Kizzy’s years on
the Lea plantation, she had not once held a pen or pencil, a
book or newspaper, nor had she mentioned to anyone that
she once read and wrote. When she thought about it, she
would wonder if she still could, should she ever want to, for
any reason. Then she would spell out in her head some
words she felt she still remembered correctly, and with
intense concentration she would mentally picture what
those words would look like written—not that she was sure
what her handwriting would look like anymore. Sometimes
she’d be tempted—but still she kept her sworn pact with
herself never to write again.
Far more than she missed writing or reading, Kizzy felt

the absence of news about what was happening in the
world beyond the plantation. She remembered how her
pappy would tell what he had heard and seen when he
returned from his trips with Massa Waller. But any outside
news was almost a rarity here on this modest and isolated
plantation, where the massa rode his own horse and drove
his own buggy. This slave row found out what was going on
outside only when Massa and Missis Lea had guests for
dinner—sometimes months apart. During one such dinner
on a Sunday afternoon in 1812, Miss Malizy ran down from
the house to them, “Dey’s eatin’ now an’ I got to hurry right
back, but dey’s talkin’ in dere ’bout some new war done
started up wid dat England! Seem like de England is
sendin’ whole shiploads of dey so’jers over here at us!”
“Ain’t sendin’ ’em over here at me!” said Sister Sarah.
“Dem’s white folks fightin’!”
“Where dey fightin’ dis war at?” asked Uncle Pompey,
and Miss Malizy said she hadn’t heard. “Well,” he replied,
“long as it’s somewheres up Nawth an’ not nowhere roun’
here, don’t make me no difference.”
That night in the cabin, sharp-eared little George asked
Kizzy, “What a war is, Mammy?”
She thought a moment before answering. “Well, I reckon
it’s whole lots of mens fightin’ ’gainst one ’nother.”
“Fightin’ ’bout what?”
“Fightin’ ’bout anything dey feels like.”
“Well, what de white folks an’ dat England feelin’ ’gainst
one’nother ’bout?”
“Boy, jes’ ain’t never no end to ’splainin’ you nothin’.”
A half hour later, Kizzy had to start smiling to herself in
the darkness when George began singing one of Miss
Malizy’s songs, barely audibly, as if just for himself, “Gon’
put on my long white robe! Down by de ribberside! Down
by de ribberside! Ain’t gon’ stu-dy de war no mo’!”
After a very long time without further news, during another
big-house dinner, Miss Malizy reported, “Dey sayin’ dem
Englands done took some city up Nawth dey calls ’Detroit.’”
Then again, months later, she said the massa, missis, and
guests were jubilantly discussing, “some great big

Newnited States ship dey’s callin’ ‘Ol’ Ironsides.’ Dey’s
sayin’ it done sunk plenty dem England ships wid its fo’tyfo’ guns!”
“Whoowee!” exclaimed Uncle Pompey. “Dat’s ’nough to
sink de ark!”
Then one Sunday in 1814, Miss Malizy had George
“helping” her in the kitchen when he came flying down to
slave row, breathless with a message: “Miss Malizy say tell
y’all dat England’s army done whupped five thousan’
Newnited States so’jers, an’ done burnt up both dat Capitol
an’ de White House.”
“Lawd, where dat at?” said Kizzy.
“In dat Washington Deecee,” said Uncle Pompey. “Dat’s
a fur piece from here.”
“Jes’ long as dey keeps killin’ an’ burnin’ one ’nother
’stead of us!” exclaimed Sister Sarah.
Then during a dinner later that year, Miss Malizy came
hurrying to tell them, “Be dog if dey ain’t all in dere a singin’
sump’n’bout dem England’s ships shootin’ at some big fort
near roun’ Baltimore.” And Miss Malizy half talked and half
sang what she had heard. Later that afternoon, there was
an odd noise outside, and the grown-ups hurried to open
their cabin doors and stood astonished: George had stuck
a long turkey feather through his hair and was high-stepping
along, banging a stick against a dried gourd and singing
loudly his own version of what he had overheard from Miss
Malizy: “Oh, hey, can you see by dat dawn early light ... an’
dem rockets’ red glare ... oh, dat star-spangle banner
wavin’ ... oh, de lan’ o’ de free, an’ de home o’ de brave—”
Within another year the boy’s gift for mimicry had
become slave row’s favorite entertainment, and one of
George’s most popular requests was for his impression of
Massa Lea. First making sure that the massa was nowhere
near, then slitting his eyes and grimacing, George drawled
angrily, “Less’n you niggers pick dis fiel’ o’ cotton clean fo’
dat sun set, y’all ain’t gon’ git no mo’ rations to eat!”
Shaking with laughter, the adults exclaimed among
themselves, “Is you ever seed anything like dat young’un?”
... “I sho’ ain’t!” ... “He jes’ a caution!” George needed but a

brief observation of anyone to mock them in a highly
comical way—including one big-house dinner guest, a
white preacher, whom the massa had taken afterward to
preach briefly to the slaves down by the chinquapin tree.
And when George caught his first good glimpse of the
mysterious old Mingo who trained the massa’s fighting
gamefowl, George was soon aping perfectly the old man’s
peculiar hitching gait. Catching two squawking barnyard
chickens and holding them tightly by their legs, he thrust
them rapidly back and forth as if they were menacing each
other while he supplied their dialogue: “Big ol’ ugly buzzardlookin’ rascal, I’m gon’ scratch yo’ eyes out!” to which the
second chicken replied scornfully, “You ain’t nothin’ but half
a mouthful o’ feathers!”
The following Saturday morning, as Massa Lea routinely
distributed the slave row’s weekly rations, Kizzy, Sister
Sarah, Miss Malizy, and Uncle Pompey were standing
dutifully before their cabin doors to receive their share when
George came tearing around a corner chasing a rat, then
screeched to a stop, having only narowly missed colliding
with the massa. Massa Lea, half amused, affected a gruff
tone: “What do you do to earn your rations around here,
boy?” The four grown-ups all but collapsed as nine-year-old
George, squaring his shoulders confidently and looking the
massa straight in the eye, declared, “I works in yo’ fields an’
I preaches, Massa!” Astounded, Massa Lea said, “Well,
let’s hear you preach, then!” With five pairs of eyes upon
him, George took a step backward and announced, “Dis
dat white preacher you brung down here, Massa—” and
suddenly he was flailing his arms and ranting, “If you specks
Uncle Pompey done took massa’s hog, tell massa! If you
sees Miss Malizy takin’ missis’ flour, tell missis! ’Cause if
y’all’s dat kin’ o’ good niggers, an’ doin’ well by yo’ good
massa an’ missis, den when y’all die, y’all might git into de
kitchen of heab’n!”
Massa Lea was doubled over with laughter even before
George finished—whereupon, flashing his strong white
teeth, the boy launched into one of Miss Malizy’s favorite
songs, “It’s me, it’s me, it’s me, O Lawd, a-standin’ in de

need o’ prayer! Not my mammy, not my pappy, but it’s me,
O Lawd, a-standin’ in de need o’ prayer! Not de preacher,
not de deacon, but me, O Lawd, a-standin’ in de need o’
prayer!”
None of the adults had ever seen Massa Lea laugh so
hard. Obviously captivated, he clapped George across the
shoulders, “Boy, you preach around here anytime you want
to!” Leaving the basket of rations for them to divide among
themselves, the massa went off back toward the big house
with his shoulders shaking, glancing back over his shoulder
at George, who stood there happily grinning.
Within weeks that summer, Massa Lea returned from a
trip bringing two long peacock plumes. Sending Miss
Malizy out to the fields to get George, he carefully instructed
the boy how he wanted the plumes waved gently back and
forth behind the guests he was inviting for dinner on the
following Sunday afternoon.
“Jes’ puttin’ on airs, tryin’ to act like dey’s rich white
folks!” scoffed Miss Malizy, after she had given Kizzy
Missis Lea’s instructions that the boy must come to the big
house scrubbed thoroughly and with his clothes freshly
washed, starched, and ironed. George was so excited
about his new role, and about all the attention that was
being paid to him—even by the massa and missis—that he
could scarcely contain himself.
The guests were still in the big house when Miss Malizy
slipped from the kitchen and ran to slave row, no longer
able to keep from reporting to her anxiously awaiting
audience. “Lemme tell y’all, dat young’un too much!” Then
she described George waving the peacock plumes, “atwistin’ his wrists an’ bendin’ hisself back an’ forth, puttin’
on mo’ airs dan massa an’ missis! An’ after dessert,
massa was pourin’ de wine, when seem like de idea jes’ hit
’im, an’ he say, ‘Hey, boy, let’s hear some preachin’!’ An’ I
declares I b’lieves dat young’un been practicin’! ’Cause
quick as dat he ax massa for some book to be his Bible,
an’ massa got ’im one. Lawd! Dat young’un jumped on
missis’ prettiest ’broidered footstool! Chile, he lit up dat
dinin’ room preachin’! Den ain’t nobody ax ’im, he

commence to singin’ his head off. Dat was when I jes’ run
out!” She fled back to the big house, leaving Kizzy, Sister
Sarah, and Uncle Pompey wagging their heads and
grinning in incredulous pride.
George had been such a success that Missis Lea began
returning from her and the massa’s Sunday afternoon
buggy rides telling Miss Malizy that previous dinner guests
whom they had met always asked about George. After a
while the usually withdrawn Missis Lea even began to
express her own fondness for him, “an’ Lawd knows, she
ain’t never liked no nigger!” exclaimed Miss Malizy.
Gradually Missis Lea began finding chores for George to
do in or around the big house, until by his eleventh year it
seemed to Kizzy that he spent hardly half of his time out
with them in the fields anymore.
And because waving his plumes at every dinner kept
George in the dining room hearing the white people’s
conversation, he began picking up more news than Miss
Malizy had ever been able to with her having to keep
running back and forth between the dining room and the
kitchen. Soon after the dinner guests left, George would
proudly tell all he had heard to the waiting ears in slave row.
They were astonished to hear how one guest had said that
“roun’ ’bout three thousan’ free niggers from lots o’ different
places held a big meetin’ in dat Philadelphia. Dis white
man say dem niggers sent some res’lution to dat Pres’dent
Madison dat both slave an’ free niggers done helped build
dis country, well as to help fight all its wars, an’ de Newnited
States ain’t what it claim to be less’n niggers shares in all
its blessin’s.” And George added, “Massa say any fool can
see free niggers ought to be run out’n de country!”
George reported that during a later dinner “dem white
folks was so mad dey turned red” in discussing recent
news of huge slave revolts in the West Indies. “Lawd, y’all
ought to o’ heared ’em gwine on in dere ’bout ship sailors
tellin’ dat Wes’ Indian slave niggers is burnin’ crops an’
buildin’s, even beatin’ an’ choppin’ up an’ hangin’ white
folks dat was dey massas!” After subsequent dinners,
George reported that a new ten-mile-an-hour speed record

had been achieved by a six-horse “Concord Coach”
between Boston and New York City, including rest stops;
that “a Massa Robert Fulton’s new paddle-wheel
steamboat done crost some ’Lantic Ocean inside o’ twelve
days!” Later, a dinner guest had described a show-boat
sensation. “Bes’ I could git it, dey calls it ‘de minstrels’—
soun’ like to me he say white mens blackin’ dey faces wid
burnt corks an’ singin’ an’ dancin’ like niggers.” Another
Sunday dinner’s conversation concerned Indians, George
said. “One dem mens said de Cherokees is takin’ up
sump’n like eighty million acres de white mens needs. He
say de gubmint would o’ took care dem Injuns long fo’ now
if wasn’t for some interferin’ big white mans, ’specially two
name of Massa Davy Crockett an’ Massa Daniel Webster.”
One Sunday in 1818, George reported “sump’n dem
guests was callin’ de ’Merican Colonize Society’ tryin’ to
send shiploads o’ free niggers off to a ‘Liberia’
somewheres in dat Africa. De white folks was a-laughin’
’bout de free niggers bein’ tol’ dat Liberia got bacon trees,
wid de slices hangin’ down like leaves, an’ ’lasses trees
you jes’ cuts to drain out all you can drink!” George said,
“Massa swear far’s he concerned, dey can’t put dem free
niggers on ships fas’ enough!”
“Hmph!” snorted Sister Sarah. “I sho’ wouldn’t go to no
Africa wid all dem niggers up in trees wid monkeys—”
“Where you git dat at?” demanded Kizzy sharply. “My
pappy come from Africa, an’ he sho’ ain’t never been in no
trees!”
Indignantly, Sister Sarah spluttered, taken aback, “Well,
ever’body grow up hearin’ dat!”
“Don’t make it right,” said Uncle Pompey, casting her a
sidewise glance. “Ain’t no ship take you nohow, you ain’t no
free nigger.”
“Well, I wouldn’t go if I was!” snapped Sister Sarah,
flouncing her head and squirting an amber stream of snuff
into the dust, annoyed now at both Uncle Pompey and
Kizzy, whom she made a point of not bidding goodnight
when the little gathering retired to their cabins. Kizzy, in turn,
was no less seething at Sister Sarah’s demeaning

implication about her wise, stiffly dignified father and his
beloved African homeland.
She was surprised and pleased to discover that even
George was irritated at what he felt was ridicule of his
African gran’pappy. Though he seemed reluctant to say
anything, he couldn’t help himself. But when he finally did,
she saw his concern about seeming disrespectful.
“Mammy, jes’ seem like Sister Sarah maybe talk what ain’t
so, don’t she?”
“Dat de truth!” Kizzy emphatically agreed.
George sat quietly for a while before he spoke again.
“Mammy,” he said hesitantly, “is it maybe any l’il mo’ you
could tell me ’bout’im?”
Kizzy felt a flooding of remorse that during the previous
winter she had gotten so exasperated with George’s
unending questions one night that she had forbidden him to
question her any further about his grandfather. She said
softly now, “Whole lot o’ times I done tried to scrape in my
min’ if it’s sump’n ’bout yo’ gran’pappy I ain’t tol’ you, an’
seem like jes’ ain’t no mo’—” She paused. “I knows you
don’t forgit nothin’—but I tell you again any part of it if you
says so.”
George was again quiet for a moment. “Mammy,” he
said, “one time you tol’ me gran’pappy give you de feelin’
dat de main thing he kep’ on his mind was tellin’ you dem
Africa things—”
“Yeah, it sho’ seem like dat, plenty time,” Kizzy said
reflectively.
After another silence, George said, “Mammy, I been
thinkin’. Same as you done fo’ me, I gwine tell my chilluns
’bout gran’pappy.” Kizzy smiled, it being so typical of her
singular son to be discussing at twelve his children of the
future.
As George’s favor continued to rise with the massa and
the missis, he was permitted increasing liberties without
their ever really having to grant them. Now and then,
especially during Sunday afternoons when they look buggy
rides, he would go wandering off somewhere on his own,
sometimes for hours, leaving the slave-row adults talking

among themselves, as he curiously explored every corner
of the Lea plantation. One such Sunday it was nearly dusk
when he returned and told Kizzy that he had spent the
afternoon visiting with the old man who took care of the
massa’s fighting chickens.
“I he’ped him catch a big ol’ rooster dat got loose, an’
after dat me an’ de ol’ man got to talkin’. He don’t seem all
dat ’culiar to me, like y’all says, Mammy. An’ I ain’t never
seen sich chickens! It’s roosters he said ain’t even grown
yet jes’ a-crowin’ an’ jumpin’ in dey pens, tryin’ to git at one
’nother to fight! Ol’ man let me pick some grass an’ feed
’em, an’ I did. He tol’ me he take mo’ pains raisin’ dem
chickens dan mos’ mammies does raisin’ dey babies!”
Kizzy’s hackles raised a bit at that but she made no
response, half amused at her son’s being so excited about
some chickens. “He showed me how he rub dey backs an’
necks an’ legs, to help ’em fight de bes’!”
“You better stay ’way from down dere, boy!” she
cautioned. “You know massa don’t ’low nobody but dat ol’
man down dere messin’ wid dem chickens!”
“Uncle Mingo say he gwine ax massa to let me come
down dere an’ help ’im feed dem chickens!”
On their way out to the field the next morning, Kizzy told
Sister Sarah of George’s latest adventure. Sarah walked
on in thoughtful silence. Then she said, “I know you don’t
hardly want me tellin’ you no mo’ fortunes, but I’m gwine tell
you jes’ a l’il ’bout dat George, anyhow.” She paused. “He
ain’t never gwine be what nobody would call no ordinary
nigger! He always gwine keep gittin’ into sump’n new an’
different jes’ long as he draw breath.”

CHAPTER 89
“He act like he well-raised, an’ he seem like he handy,
Massa,” said Uncle Mingo, concluding his description of
the boy who lived up on slave row but whose name he had
neglected to ask.
When Massa Lea immediately agreed to give him a
tryout, Mingo was greatly pleased—since he had been
wanting a helper for several years—but not really surprised.
He was well aware that the massa was concerned about
his gamecock trainer’s advancing age and uncertain
health; for the past five or six months he had fallen prey to
increasingly frequent spells of bad coughing. He also knew
that the massa’s efforts to buy a promising young slave
apprentice trainer had come to nought among the area’s
other gamecock owners, who were quite naturally
disinclined to help him out. “If I had any boy showing any
signs of ability,” the massa told him one had said, “you got
to have more sense than to think I’d sell him. With that old
Mingo of yours training him, five or ten years from now I’d
see him helping you beat me!” But the likeliest reason for
Massa Lea’s quick approval, Mingo knew, was that
Caswell County’s annual cockfighting season would be
opening shortly with the big New Year “main” fight, and if
the boys simply fed the younger birds, Mingo would be able
to spend that much more time conditioning and training the
freshly matured two-year-olds that soon would be brought in
from their open rangewalks.
On the morning of George’s first day on the job, Mingo
showed him how to feed the scores of cockerels that were
kept in several pens, each containing young birds of
roughly the same ages and sizes. Seeing that the boy
performed that trial task acceptably, the old man next let
him feed the more matured “stags,” not quite a year old but
already trying to fight each other from their triangular pens
within the zigs and zags of a split-rail fence. Through the
days that followed, Mingo kept George practically on the

run, feeding the birds their cracked corn, giving them clean
grit, oyster shell, and charcoal, and changing the sweet
spring water in their drinking tins three times daily.
George had never dreamed that he could feel awe for
chickens—especially the stags, which were starting to grow
spurs and to develop bright feather colors as they strutted
fearlessly about with their lustrous eyes flashing defiance. If
he was away from Uncle Mingo’s immediate scrutiny,
sometimes George would laugh aloud at how some of the
stags would suddenly rear back their heads and crow
awkwardly and throatily, as if they were trying to compete
with the frequent raucous cries of Mingo’s six- or sevenyear-old roosters—each bearing the scars of many past
battles—that Uncle Mingo called “catchcocks” and always
fed himself. George pictured himself as one of the stags
and Uncle Mingo as one of the old roosters.
At least once every day, when Massa Lea came riding
on his horse down the sandy road into the gamecock
training area, George would make himself as
inconspicuous as possible, having quickly sensed how
much chillier the massa was acting toward him. George
had heard Miss Malizy saying that the massa didn’t even
permit the missis to come down where his chickens were,
but she had indignantly assured him that was the last thing
she’d want to do.
The massa and Mingo would go walking around,
inspecting the pens of gamefowl, with Mingo always
keeping exactly one step behind, close enough to hear and
respond to whatever the massa said between the crowings
of the scarred old catchcock roosters. George noticed that
the massa spoke almost companionably with Uncle Mingo,
in sharp contrast to his brusque and cold manner with Uncle
Pompey, Sister Sarah, and his mammy, who were only field
hands. Sometimes when their inspection tour brought them
close enough to wherever George was working, he would
then overhear what they were saying. “I figure to fight thirty
cocks this season, Mingo, so we’ve got to bring in around
sixty or more from the rangewalk,” said the massa one day.
“Yassuh, Massa. By de time we culls ’em out, we oughta

have a good forty birds dat’ll train good.”
George’s head became more and more filled with
questions every day, but he had the feeling it would be best
not to ask Uncle Mingo anything he didn’t have to. Mingo
scored it as a point in the boy’s favor that he could keep
from talking too much, since wise gamecockers kept many
secrets to themselves. Mingo’s small, quick, deeply
squinting eyes, meanwhile, missed no detail of how
George performed his work. Deliberately he gave his
orders briefly and then quickly walked away, to test how
quickly and well the boy would grasp and remember
instructions ; Mingo was pleased that George seemed to
need to be told most things only once.
After a while, Mingo told Massa Lea that he approved of
George’s care and attention to the gamefowl—but he
carefully qualified himself: “Leas’ways far as I been able to
tell in jes’ dis little bit o’ time, Massa.”
Mingo was totally unprepared for Massa Lea’s reply: “I’ve
been thinking you need that boy down here all the time.
Your cabin’s not big enough, so you and him put up a shack
somewhere so he’ll be handy to you all the time.” Mingo
was appalled at the prospect of anyone’s sudden and total
invasion of the privacy that only he and the gamefowl had
shared for over twenty years, but he wasn’t about to voice
openly any disagreement.
After the massa had left, he spoke to George in a sour
tone. “Massa say I needs you down here all de time. I
reckon he must know sump’n I don’t.”
“Yassuh,” said George, struggling to keep his expression
blank. “But where I gwine stay at, Uncle Mingo?”
“We got to buil’ you a shack.”
As much as he enjoyed the gamecocks and Uncle
Mingo, George knew this would mean the end of his
enjoyable times in the big house, waving the peacock
plumes and preaching for the massa and the missis and
their guests. Even Missis Lea had just begun to show that
she’d taken a liking to him. And he thought of the good
things he wouldn’t get to eat from Miss Malizy in the kitchen
anymore. But the worst part about leaving slave row was

going to be breaking the news to his mammy.
Kizzy was soaking her tired feet in a washpan full of hot
water when George came in, his face unusually somber.
“Mammy, sump’n I got to tell you.”
“Well, tired as I is, choppin’ all day long, I don’t want to
hear no mo’ ’bout dem chickens, tell you dat!”
“Well, ain’t zackly dat.” He took a deep breath. “Mammy,
massa done tol’ me an’ Uncle Mingo to buil’ a shack an’
move me down dere.”
Kizzy sent some of the water splattering out of the pan as
she leaped up, seemingly ready to spring on George.
“Move you fo’ what? What you can’t do stayin’ up here
where you always been?”
“Weren’t my doin’, Mammy! It was massa!” He stepped
back from the fury on her face, voice rising to a highpitched cry, “I ain’t wantin’ to leave you, Mammy!”
“You ain’t ol’ enough to be movin’ nowhere! I bet it’s dat
ol’ Mingo nigger put massa up to it!”
“No’m, he didn’t Mammy! ’Cause I can tell he don’t like it
neither! He don’t like nobody roun’ him all de time. He done
tol’ me he ruther be by hisself.” George wished he could
think of something to say that would calm her down. “Massa
feel like he bein’ good to me, Mammy. He treat Uncle
Mingo an’ me nice, ain’t like he acts to fiel’ hands—” Too
late, he gulped sickly, remembering that his mammy was a
field hand. Jealousy and bitterness twisted her face as she
grabbed George and shook him like a rag, screaming,
“Massa don’t care nothin’ bout you. He may be yo’ pappy,
but he don’t care nothin’ ’bout nobody but dem chickens!”
She was almost as stunned as he was by what she had
said.
“It’s true! An’ jes’ well you know it fo’ you’s figgerin’ he
doin’ you sich favors! Only thing massa wants is you’s
helpin’ dat ol’ crazy nigger take care his chickens dat he
figger gwine make him rich!”
George stood dumfounded.
She went pummeling at George with both fists. “Well,
what you hangin’ on roun’ here fo’?” Whirling, she snatched
up his few items of clothing and flung them toward him.

“G’wan! Git out’n dis cabin!”
George stood there as if he had been poleaxed. Feeling
her tears flooding up and spilling out, Kizzy ran from the
cabin and went bolting across to Miss Malizy’s.
George’s own tears trickled down his face. After a while,
unsure what else to do, he stuffed his few pieces of clothing
into a sack and went stumbling back down the road to the
gamecock area. He slept near one of the stag pens, using
his sack for his pillow.
In the predawn, the early-rising Mingo came upon him
asleep there and guessed what had happened. Throughout
the day, he went out of his way to be gentle with the boy,
who went about his tasks silent and withdrawn.
During their two days of building the tiny shack, Mingo
began speaking to him as if he had only just now really
become aware of George’s presence. “Yo’ life got to be
dese chickens, til dey’s like yo’ family, boy,” he said
abruptly one morning—that being the foremost thing that he
wanted to plant in his mind.
But George made no response. He couldn’t think of
anything but what his mother had told him. His massa was
his pappy. His pappy was his massa. He couldn’t deal with
it either way.
When the boy still said nothing, Mingo spoke again. “I
knows dem niggers up yonder thinks I’se peculiar—” He
hesitated. “I reckon I is.” Now he fell silent.
George realized that Uncle Mingo expected him to
respond. But he couldn’t admit that that was exactly what he
had heard about the old man. So he asked a question that
had been on his mind since the first day he came to visit.
“Uncle Mingo, how come dese chickens ain’t like de rest?”
“You’s talkin’ ’bout tame chickens ain’t fit for nothin’ ’cept
eatin’,” said Uncle Mingo scornfully. “Dese here birds near
’bout same as dey was back in dem jungles massa say dey
come from in ancient times. Fact, I b’leeves you stick one
dese cocks in de jungle, he jes’ fight to take over de hens
an’ kill any other roosters jes’ like he ain’t never left.”
George had other questions he’d been saving up to ask,
but he hardly got the chance to open his mouth once Uncle

Mingo got going. Any gamecockerel that crowed before
reaching the stag stage, he said, should promptly have its
neck wrung, for crowing too early was a sure signal of
cowardice later on. “De true birds come out’n de egg wid
de fightin’ already in dey blood from dey gran’daddies and
great-gran’daddies. Massa say ’way back, a man an’ his
gamechickens was like a man an’ his dogs is now. But
dese birds got mo’ fightin’ in ’em dan you fin’ in dogs, or
bulls, or bears, or ’coons, or whole lots of mens! Massa say
it’s all de way up to kings an’ pres’dents fights gamebirds,
’cause it’s de greatest sport dey is.”
Uncle Mingo noticed George staring at the latticework of
small, livid scars on his black hands, wrists, and forearms.
Going over to his cabin, Mingo returned shortly with a pair
of curving steel spurs that tapered to needle sharpness.
“De day you starts to handlin’ birds, yo’ hands gon’ be
lookin’ like mine, less’n you’s mighty careful,” said Uncle
Mingo, and George was thrilled that the old man seemed to
consider it possible that he might put spurs on the massa’s
gamefowl one day.
Through the following weeks, though, long intervals would
pass when Uncle Mingo wouldn’t permit much
conversation, for it had been years since he had talked with
anyone except for the massa and the gamechickens. But
the more he began to get used to having George around—
and thinking of the boy as his assistant—the oftener he
would break his silence to address him, almost always
abruptly, about something he felt would help George to
understand that only the most superbly bred, conditioned,
and trained gamefowl could consistently win fights and
money for Massa Lea.
“Massa don’t fear no man in de cockpit,” Uncle Mingo
told him one night. “Fact, he love to match up ’gainst dem
real rich massas dat can ’ford dem flocks o’ much as a
thousand birds so dey can pick out maybe dey bes’
hundred to fight wid ever’ year. You see we ain’t got no
great big flock, but massa still win plenty bettin’ ’gainst dem
rich ones. Dey don’t like it cause he done come up in de
world from startin’ out as a po’ cracker. But wid ’nough real

fine birds an’ ’nough luck, massa could git to be jes’ big an
rich as dey is—” Uncle Mingo squinted at George. “You
hear me, boy? Whole lots of peoples ain’t realize how much
money can be winned in cock fightin’. I knows one thing, if
somebody was to offer me a hunnud-acre cotton or
tobacco field, or a real good fightin’ cock, I take de bird
every time. Dat’s how massa feel, too. Dat’s how come he
ain’t put his money in no whole big lot of land or ownin’ no
big passel o’ niggers.”
By the time George turned fourteen, he began his
Sundays off by visiting with his slave-row family, which he
felt included Miss Malizy, Sister Sarah, and Uncle Pompey
no less than his own mammy. Even after all this time, he
would have to reassure her that he harbored no ill will over
the way she told him about his father. But he still thought a
lot about his pappy, though he never discussed it with
anyone, least of all the massa. Everyone on slave row by
now was openly awed by his new status, though they tried
to seem as if they weren’t.
“I diapered yo’ messy behind, an’ you jes’ let me catch
you puttin’ on any airs, I still beat it in a minute!” exclaimed
Sister Sarah with affectionate mock ferocity one Sunday
morning.
George grinned. “No’m, Sister Sarah, ain’t got no airs.”
But they were all consumed with curiosity about the
mysterious things that took place down in the forbidden
area where he lived with the gamecocks. George told them
only things of a routine nature. He said he had seen
gamecocks kill a rat, drive off a cat, even attack a fox. But
the gamehens could be as bad-tempered as the roosters,
he told them, and sometimes even crowed like the
roosters. He said that the massa was vigilant against
trespassers because of the high prices one could get for
even the stolen eggs of championship birds, not to mention
for the birds themselves, which thieves could easily take
into another state and sell—or even fight as their own.
When George said that Uncle Mingo had spoken of as
much as three thousand dollars having been paid for one
bird by the very rich gamecocking Massa Jewett, Miss

Malizy exclaimed, “Lawd, could o’ bought three-four niggers
for less’n dat chicken!”
After he had talked with them at length, George would
begin to grow restless and fidgety by early Sunday
afternoon. And soon he would go hurrying back down the
sandy road to his chickens. Slowing down as he passed
their pens along the road, he would pluck fresh tender
green grass, drop a handful into each one, and sometimes
stand awhile, enjoying the stags’ contented gluck, gluck,
gluck as they gobbled it down. About a year old now, they
were maturing into glossy full feather, with fire in their eyes,
and entering a stage of sudden explosive crowing and
vicious flurrying efforts to get at each other. “De quicker de
better we gits ’em out to de rangewalks to start matin’!”
Uncle Mingo had said not long ago.
George knew that would happen when the fully matured
roosters already out on the rangewalks would be brought in
to be conditioned and trained for the coming cockfighting
season.
After visiting with the stags, George would usually spend
the rest of his afternoon off wandering farther down the road
into the pine groves where the rangewalks were.
Occasionally he caught a glimpse of one of the fully grown
birds there ruling a covey of hens in total liberty. Grass,
seeds, grasshoppers, and other insects, he knew, were
plentiful there, along with good gravel for their craws and as
much sweet, fresh water as they wanted from the grove’s
several natural springs.
One chilly morning in early November, when Massa Lea
arrived in the mulecart, Uncle Mingo and George were
waiting with the crowing, viciously pecking stags already
collected in covered wicker baskets. After loading them
into the cart, George helped Uncle Mingo catch his favorite
old scarred, squawking catchcock.
“He’s just like you, Mingo,” said Massa Lea with a laugh.
“Done all his fightin’ an’ breedin’ in his young days. Fit for
nothin’ but to eat and crow now!”
Grinning, Uncle Mingo said, “I ain’t hardly even crowin’ no
mo’ now, Massa.”

Since George was as much in awe of Uncle Mingo as he
was afraid of the massa, he was happy to see them both in
such rare good spirits. Then the three of them climbed onto
the mulecart, Uncle Mingo seated alongside the massa
holding his old catchcock, and George balancing himself in
the back behind the baskets.
Finally Massa Lea stopped the cart deep in the pine
grove. He and Uncle Mingo cocked their heads, listening
carefully. Then Mingo spoke softly. “I hears ’em back in
dere!” Abruptly puffing his cheeks, he blew hard on the
head of the old catchcock, which promptly crowed
vigorously.
Within seconds came a loud crowing from among the
trees, and again the old catchcock rooster crowed, its
hackles rising. Then goosepimples broke out over George
when he saw the magnificent gamecock that came bursting
from the edge of the grove. Iridescent feathers were
bristled high over the solid body; the glossy tail feathers
were arched. A covey of about nine hens came hurrying up
nervously, scratching and clucking, as the rangewalk cock
powerfully beat its wings and gave a shattering crow,
jerking its head about, looking for the intruder.
Massa Lea spoke in a low tone. “Let him see the
catchcock, Mingo!”
Uncle Mingo hoisted it high, and the rangewalk cock
seemed almost to explode into the air straight after the old
rooster. Massa Lea moved swiftly, grabbing the thrashing
rangewalk cock in flight, deftly avoiding the wickedly long
natural spurs that George glimpsed as the massa thrust it
into a basket and closed the top.
“What you gawkin’ for, boy? Loose one dem stags!”
barked Uncle Mingo, as if George had done it before. He
fumbled open the nearest basket, and the released stag
flapped out beyond the mulecart and to the ground. After no
more than a moment’s hesitation, it flapped its wings,
crowed loudly, dropped one wing, and went strutting stiffly
around one hen. Then the new cock o’ the walk started
chasing all the other hens back into the pine grove.
Twenty-eight mature two-year-olds had been replaced

with year-old stags when the mulecart returned just before
dusk. After doing it all over again to get thirty-two more the
next day, George felt he had been retrieving gamecocks
from rangewalks all his life. He now busily fed and watered
the sixty cocks. When they weren’t eating, it seemed to him,
they were crowing and pecking angrily at the sides of their
pens, constructed so as to prevent their seeing each other,
which would have caused some of them to get injured in
their violent efforts to fight. With wonder, George beheld
these majestically wild, vicious, and beautiful birds. They
embodied everything that Uncle Mingo ever had told him
about their ancient bloodlines of courage, about how both
their physical design and their instincts made them ready to
fight any other gamecock to the death anytime, anywhere.
The massa believed in training twice as many birds as
he planned to fight during the season. “Some birds jes’
don’t never pink up an’ feed an’ work like de rest,” Uncle
Mingo explained to George, “an’ dem what don’t we’s
gwine to cull out.” Massa Lea began to arrive earlier than
before to work along with Uncle Mingo, studying the sixty
birds, one by one, for several hours each day. Overhearing
snatches of their conversations, George gathered that they
would be culling out birds with any sores on their heads or
bodies, or with what they judged to be less than perfect
beaks, necks, wings, legs, or over-all configuration. But the
worst sin of all was not showing enough aggressiveness.
One morning the massa arrived with a carton from the
big house. George watched as Uncle Mingo measured out
quantities of wheatmeal and oatmeal and mixed them into
a paste with butter, a bottle of beer, the whites of twelve
gamehen eggs, some wood sorrel, ground ivy, and a little
licorice. The resulting dough was patted into thin, round
cakes, which were baked to crispness in a small earth
oven. “Dis bread give ’em strength,” said Uncle Mingo,
instructing George to break the cakes into small bits, feed
each bird three handfuls daily, and put a little sand in their
water-pans each time he refilled them.
“I want ’em exercised down to nothin’ but muscle and
bone, Mingo! I don’t want one ounce of fat in that cockpit!”

George heard the massa order. “Gwine run dey tails off,
Massa!” Starting the next day, George was sprinting back
and forth tightly holding under an arm one of Uncle Mingo’s
old, catchcocks as it was hotly pursued by one after another
of the cocks in training. As Mingo had instructed, George
would occasionally let the pursuing cock get close enough
to spring up with its beak snapping and legs scissoring at
the furiously squawking catchcock.
Catching the panting aggressor, Uncle Mingo would
quickly let it hungrily peck up a walnut-sized ball of unsalted
butter mixed with beaten herbs. Then he would put the tired
bird on some soft straw within a deep basket, piling more
straw over the bird, up to the top, then closing the lid. “It
gwine sweat good down in dere now,” he explained. After
exercising the last of the cocks, George began removing
the sweating birds from their baskets. Before he returned
them to their pens, Uncle Mingo licked each bird’s head
and eyes with his tongue, explaining to George, “Dat git
’em used to it if I has to suck blood clots out’n dey beaks to
help ’em keep breathin’ when dey done got bad hurt
fightin’.”
By the end of a week, so many sharp, natural cockspurs
had nicked George’s hands and forearms that Uncle Mingo
grunted, “You gwine git mistook fo’ a gamecocker, you
don’t watch out!” Except for George’s brief Christmasmorning visit to slave row, the holiday season passed for
him almost unnoticed. Now, as the opening of the
cockfighting season approached, the birds’ killer instincts
were at such a fever pitch that they crowed and pecked
furiously at anything, beating their wings with a loud
whumping noise. George found himself thinking how often
he heard his mammy, Miss Malizy, Sister Sarah, and Uncle
Pompey bemoaning their lot; little did they dream what an
exciting life existed just a short walk down the road.
Two days after the New Year, George grasped each
gamecock in turn as Massa Lea and Uncle Mingo closely
snipped each bird’s head feathers, shortened the neck,
wing, and rump feathers, then shaped the tail feathers into
short, curving fans. George found it hard to believe how

much the trimming accentuated the birds’ slim, compact
bodies, snakelike necks, and big, strong-beaked heads
with their shining eyes. Some of the birds’ lower beaks had
to be trimmed, too, “for when dey has to grab a mouth holt,”
explained Uncle Mingo. Finally, their natural spurs were
scraped smooth and clean.
At the first light of opening day, Mingo and George were
stowing the finally selected twelve birds in square traveling
coops woven of hickory strips. Uncle Mingo fed each bird a
walnut-sized lump of butter mixed with powdered brownsugar candy, then Massa Lea arrived in the wagon,
carrying a peck of red apples. After George and Mingo
loaded the twelve cockcoops, Mingo climbed up on the
seat beside the massa, and the wagon began rolling.
Glancing back, Uncle Mingo rasped, “You gwine or not?”
Leaping after them, George reached the wagon’s
tailgate and vaulted up and in. No one had said he was
going! After catching his breath, he hunkered down into a
squatting position. The wagon’s squeakings mingled in his
ears with the gamecocks’ crowings, cluckings, and
peckings. He felt deep gratitude and respect for Uncle
Mingo and Massa Lea. And he thought again—always with
perplexity and surprise—about his mammy’s having said
that the massa was his daddy, or his daddy was the
massa, whichever it was.
Farther along the road, George began seeing either
ahead or emerging from side roads other wagons, carts,
carriages, and buggies, as well as horsemen, and poor
crackers on foot carrying bulging crocus sacks that George
knew contained gamecocks bedded in straw. He
wondered if Massa Lea had once walked to cockfights like
that with his first bird, which people said he had won with a
raffle ticket. George saw that most of the vehicles carried
one or more white men and slaves, and every vehicle
carried some cockpens. He remembered Uncle Mingo’s
saying, “Cockfightin’ folks don’t care nothin’ ’bout time or
distance when a big main gwine happen.” George
wondered if maybe some of those poor crackers afoot
would someday come to own a farm and a big house like

the massa did.
After about two hours, George began hearing what could
only be the crowing of many gamecocks faintly in the
distance. The incredible chorus grew steadily louder as the
wagon drew nearer to a heavy thicket of tall forest pines.
He smelled the aroma of barbecuing meat; then the wagon
was among others maneuvering for places to park. All
around, horses and mules were tied to hitching posts,
snorting, stomping, swishing their tails, and many men were
talking.
“Tawm Lea!”
The massa had just stood up in the wagon, flexing his
knees to relieve the stiffness. George saw that the cry had
come from several poor crackers standing nearby
exchanging a bottle among themselves, and was thrilled at
the instant recognition of his massa. Waving at those men,
Massa Lea jumped to the ground and soon had joined the
crowd. Hundreds of white people—from small boys holding
their fathers’ pantslegs to old, wrinkled men—were all
milling about in conversational clusters. Glancing around,
George saw that nearly all the slave people remained in
vehicles, seemingly attending to their cooped gamecocks,
and the hundreds of birds sounded as if they were staging
a crowing contest. George saw bedrolls under various
nearby wagons and guessed that the owners had come
from such long distances that they were going to have to
stay overnight. He could smell the pungent aroma of corn
liquor.
“Quit settin’ dere gapin’, boy! We got to limber up dese
birds!” said Uncle Mingo, who had just gotten the wagon
parked. Blocking out the unbelievable excitement as best
he could, George began opening the travel coops and
handing one after another angrily pecking bird into Uncle
Mingo’s gnarled black hands, which proceeded to
massage each bird’s legs and wings. Receiving the final
bird, Uncle Mingo said, “Chop up half dozen dem apples
good an’ fine. Dey’s de bes’ las’ eatin’ fo’ dese birds gits
to fightin’.” Then the old man’s glance happened to catch
the boy’s glazed stare at the crowd, and Uncle Mingo

remembered how it had been for him at his first cockfight,
longer ago than he cared to think about anymore “G’wan!”
he barked, “git out’n here an’ run roun’ l’il bit if you want to,
but be back fo’ dey starts, you hear me?”
By the time his “Yassuh” reached Uncle Mingo, George
had vaulted over the wagon’s side and was gone. Slithering
among the jostling, drinking crowd, he darted this way and
that, the carpeting of pine needles springy under his bare
feet. He passed dozens of cockcoops containing crowing
birds in an incredible array of plumage from snow-white to
coal-black, with every imaginable combination of colors in
between.
George stopped short when he saw it. It was a large
sunken circle, about two feet deep, with padded sides, and
its packed sandy clay floor was marked with a small circle
in its exact center and two straight lines equally distant from
each side. The cockpit! Looking up, he saw boisterous
men finding seats on a natural sloping rise behind it, a lot of
them exchanging bottles. Then he all but jumped from his
skin at the nearby bellow of a reddish-faced official,
“Gentlemen, let’s get started fighting these birds!”
George sped back like a hare, reaching the wagon only
an instant before Massa Lea did. Then the massa and
Uncle Mingo went walking around the wagon talking in low
tones as they glanced at the cooped birds. Standing up on
the wagon’s front seat, George could see over men’s
heads to the cockpit. Four men there were talking closely
together as two others came toward them, each cradling a
gamecock under an arm. Suddenly cries rose among the
spectators: “Ten on the red!” ... “Taken!” ... “Twenty on the
blue!” ... “Five of it!” ... “Five more!” ... “Covered!” The cries
grew louder and more numerous as George saw the two
birds being weighed and then fitted by their owners with
what George knew must be the needle-sharp steel gaffs.
His memory flashed to Uncle Mingo once telling him that
birds were seldom fought if either of them was more than
two ounces lighter or heavier than the other.
“Bill your cocks!” cried someone at the edge of the
cockpit. Then quickly he and two other men squatted

outside the ring, as the two owners squatted, within the
circle, holding their birds closely enough to let them peck
briefly at each other.
“Get ready!” Backing to their opposite starting marks, the
two owners held their birds onto the ground, straining to get
at each other.
“Pit your cocks!”
With blurring speed, the gamecocks lunged against each
other so hard that each of them went bouncing backward,
but recovering within a second, they were up into the air
shuffling their steel-gaffed legs. Dropping back onto the pit
floor, instantly they were airborne again, a flurry of feathers.
“The red’s cut!” someone hollered, and George watched
breathlessly as each owner snatched his bird as it came
down, examining the bird quickly, then set it back on its
start mark. The cut, desperate red bird somehow sprang
higher than its opponent, and suddenly one of its scissoring
legs had driven a steel gaff into the brain of the blue bird. It
fell with its wings fluttering convulsively in death. Amid a
welter of excited shouting and coarse cursing, George
heard the referee’s loud announcement, “The winner is Mr.
Grayson’s bird—a minute and ten seconds in the second
pitting!”
George’s breath came in gasps. He saw the next fight
end even more quickly, one owner angrily flinging aside his
losing bird’s bloody body as if it were a rag. “Dead bird jes’
a mess of feathers,” said Uncle Mingo close behind
George. The sixth or the seventh fight had ended when an
official cried out, “Mr. Lea!” ...
The massa walked hurriedly away from the wagon
cradling a bird under his arm. George remembered feeding
that bird, exercising it, holding it in his arms; he felt dizzy
with pride. Then the massa and his opponent were by the
cockpit, weighing-in their birds, then fitting on the steel
gaffs amid a clamor of betting cries.
At “Pit your cocks!” the two birds smashed head-on,
taking to the air, they dropped back to the floor, furiously
pecking, feinting, their snakelike necks maneuvering,
seeking any opening. Again bursting upward, they beat at

each other with their wings—and then they fell with Massa
Lea’s bird reeling, obviously gaffed! But within seconds, in
the next aerial flurry, the massa’s bird fatally sank his own
gaff.
Massa Lea snatched up his bird—which was still crowing
in triumph—and came running back to the wagon. Only
vaguely George heard, “The winner is Mr. Lea’s”—as Uncle
Mingo seized the bleeding bird, his fingers flying over its
body to locate the deep slash wound in the rib cage.
Clamping his lips over it, Uncle Mingo’s cheeks puckered
inward with his force of sucking out the clotted blood.
Suddenly thrusting the bird down before George’s knees,
Mingo barked, “Piss on it! Right there!” The thunderstruck
George gaped. “Piss! Keep it from ’fectin’!” Fumbling,
George did so, his strong stream splattering against the
wounded bird and Uncle Mingo’s hands. Then Uncle Mingo
was packing the bird lightly between soft straw in a deep
basket. “B’lieve we save ’im, Massa! What one you fightin’
next?” Massa Lea gestured toward a coop. “Git dat bird
out, boy!” George nearly fell over himself complying, and
Massa Lea went hurrying back toward the shouting crowd
as another fight’s winner was announced. Faintly, beneath
the raucous crowing of hundreds of cocks crowing, of men
shouting new bets, George could hear the injured bird
clucking weakly in his basket. He was sad, exultant,
frightened; he had never been so excited. And on that crisp
morning, a new gamecocker had been born.

CHAPTER 90
“Look at ’im tryin’ to outstrut dem roosters!” exclaimed
Kizzy to Miss Malizy, Sister Sarah, and Uncle Pompey.
George came striding up the road to spend his Sunday
morning with them.
“Hmph!” Sister Sarah snorted with a glance at Kizzy.
“Aw, heish up, woman, we’s jes’ proud of ’im as you is!”
As George came on, still well beyond earshot, Miss
Malizy told the others that only the previous evening she
had overheard Massa Lea declare tipsily to some
gamecocker dinner guests that he had a boy who after four
years of apprenticeship seemed as “natural born” to
become, in time, “the equal of any white or black gamecock
trainer in Caswell County.”
“Massa say de ol’ Mingo nigger say dat boy jes’ live an’
breathe chickens! ’Cordin’ to massa, Mingo swear one
evenin’ late he was walkin’ roun’ down dere an’ seed
George settin’ hunched over kind of funny on a stump.
Mingo say he ease up behin’ real slow, an’ he be dog if’n
George wasn’t talkin’ to some hens settin’ on dey eggs. He
swear dat boy was tellin’ dem hens all ’bout fights gwine be
winned by de baby chicks de hens ’bout to hatch.”
“Do Lawd!” said Kizzy, her eyes bathing in the sight of
her approaching son. After the usual kissing and hugging
with the women and handshaking with Uncle Pompey, they
all settled onto stools brought quickly from their cabins.
First they told George the latest white folks’ news that Miss
Malizy had managed to overhear during the week. The
scant news this time was that more and more strangetalking white folks from across the big water were said to
be arriving by the shiploads up North, swelling the numbers
of those already fighting to take the jobs previously held by
free blacks, and there was also steadily increasing talk of
sending the free blacks on ships to Africa. Living as he did
in such isolation with that strange old man, they kidded
George, he couldn’t be expected to know about any of this,

or about anything else that was going on in the rest of the
world—“less’n it git told to you by some dem chickens”—
and George laughingly agreed.
These weekly visits offered not only the pleasure of
seeing his mammy and the others but also of getting some
relief from Uncle Mingo’s cooking, which was more suitable
for chickens than for people. Miss Malizy and Kizzy knew
enough by now to prepare at least two or three platefuls of
George’s favorite dishes.
When his conversation began to lag—around noon, as
usual—they knew he was getting restless to leave, and
after they had exacted his promise to pray regularly, and
after another round of huggings and kissings and pumping
of hands, George went hurrying back down the road with
his basket of food to share with Uncle Mingo.
In the summertime, George often spent the rest of his
Sunday afternoon “off” in a grassy pasture where Mingo
could see him springing about catching grasshoppers,
which he would then feed as tidbits to the penned-up
cockerels and stags. But this was early winter, and the twoyear-old birds had just been retrieved from the rangewalks
for training, and George was trying to salvage one of the
several birds that Mingo and the massa felt were probably
too wild and man-shy to respond properly to training and
were likely to be culled out as discards. Mingo watched
with affection and amusement as George forcibly
restrained the pecking, squawking, struggling stag and
started crooning to it, blowing gently on its head and neck,
rubbing his face against the brilliant feathers, massaging its
body, legs, and wings—until it actually began to settle
down.
Mingo wished him luck, but he hoped George
remembered what he had told him about taking chances
with an unreliable bird. A gamecocker’s breeding and
development of a fine gameflock could represent a lifetime
investment, and it could all be lost in a single emotional
gamble. You simply couldn’t risk fighting a bird unless every
detectable flaw had been permanently corrected. And if it
wasn’t well, George had learned by now to quite calmly

wring a gamecock’s neck. He had come to share fully the
massa’s and Uncle Mingo’s view that the only worthwhile
birds were those whose intense training and conditioning,
coupled with instinctive aggressiveness and courage,
would drive them to drop dead in a cockpit before they
would quit fighting.
George loved it when the massa’s birds killed their
opponents swiftly and without injury, sometimes within as
little as thirty or forty seconds, but privately—though he
never would have breathed this to Mingo or Massa Lea—
nothing could match the thrill of watching a bird he had
helped raise from a baby chick battle to the death with
another equally game champion, each of them staggering,
torn and bleeding, beaks lolling open, tongues hanging out,
wings dragging on the cockpit floor, bodies and legs
trembling, until finally both simply collapsed; then with the
referee counting toward ten, the massa’s bird would find
somehow one more ounce of strength to struggle up and
drive in a fatal spur.
George understood very well Mingo’s deep attachment
to the five or six scarred old catchcocks that he treated
almost as pets—especially the one he said had won the
biggest bet of the massa’s career. “Terriblest fight I ever
seed!” said Uncle Mingo, nodding toward that one-eyed
veteran. “It was back dere in his prime, reckon three-four
years fo’ you come here. Somehow or ’nother massa had
got in dis great big New Year’s main bein’ backed by some
real rich massa clear over in Surrey County, Virginia.
Dey’nounced no less’n two hunnud cocks was to fight for a
ten thousand dollars’ main stake, wid no less’n hunnuddollar side bets. Well, massa an’ me took twenty birds. You
lemme tell you, dem twenty birds was ready! We driv days
in de wagon to git dere, feedin’, waterin’, an’ massagin’
dem birds in dey coops as we went. Well, gittin’ on near de
end o’ de fightin’, we’d winned some, but we’d lost too
many to git at dat main purse, an’ massa was plenty mad.
Den he foun’ out we was gwine be matched ’gainst what
folks claimin’ was de meanest mess o’ feathers in Virginia.
You oughta heared de hollerin’ of bets on dat bird!

“Well, now! Massa’d done hit his bottle a couple good
licks, an’ got all red in de face as he could git! An’ out’n de
birds we had left, he pick dat ol’ buzzard you’s lookin’ at
right over dere. Massa stuck dat bird under one arm, an’
commence walkin’ roun’ dat cockpit swearin’ loud he
weren’t backin’ off nobody’s bets! He say he started wid
nothin’, if he win’ up wid nothin’ again, he sho’ wouldn’t be
no stranger to it! Boy, lemme tell you! Dat tough ol’ meat
an’ pinfeathers over yonder went in dat cockpit, an’ he
come out jes’ barely, but dat other bird was dead! Dem
referees ’nounced dey’d been steady tryin’ to kill one
’nother for nigh fo’teen minutes!” Uncle Mingo looked with
warm nostalgia across at the old rooster. “So bad cut up
an’ bleedin’ he was s’posed to die, but I ain’t slept a wink
’til I saved ’im!”
Uncle Mingo turned toward George. “Fact, boy, dis
sump’n I’se got’ to press on you mo’n I’se done—you got to
do everything you can to save hurt birds. Even dem dat’s
been lucky ’nough to kill quick, an’ standin’ up dere crowin’
big an’ actin’ ready to fight again, well, dey can fool you!
Soon’s you git ’im back in yo’ wagon, be sho’ you checks
’im good all over, real close! Maybe he got jes’ some l’il
spur cuts, or nicks, dat can easy git ’fected. Any sich cut,
piss on it good. If it’s any bleedin’, put on a spider web
compress, or l’il bit o’ de soft belly fur of a rabbit. If you
don’t, two-three days later yo’ bird can start lookin’ like it’s
shrinkin’ up, like a limp rag, den next thing you know yo’
bird dead. Gamebirds is like I hears racehosses is. Dey’s
tough, but same time dey’s mighty delicate critters.”
It seemed to George that Uncle Mingo must have taught
him a thousand things, yet thousands more were still in
Uncle Mingo’s head. As hard as George had tried to
understand, he still couldn’t comprehend how Mingo—and
the massa—could seem to sense which birds would prove
to be the smartest, boldest, and proudest in the cockpit. It
wasn’t simply the assets you could see, which by now even
George had learned to recognize: the ideal short, broad
backs with the full, rounded chests tapering to a fine,
straight keel-bone and a small, compact belly. He knew that

good, solid, round-boned wings should have hard-quilled,
wide, glossy feathers that tended to meet under a medianangled tail; that short, thick, muscular legs should be
spaced well apart, with stout spurs evenly spaced above
strong feet whose long back toe should spread well
backward and flat to the ground.
Uncle Mingo would chide George for becoming so fond
of some birds that he seemed to forget their jungle
instincts. Now or then some gamecock docilely being
petted in George’s lap would glimpse one of Uncle Mingo’s
old catchcocks and with a shattering crow burst from
George’s grasp in violent pursuit of the old bird, with
George racing to stop them before one killed the other.
Uncle Mingo also repeatedly cautioned George to control
his emotions better when some bird of George’s got killed
in the cockpit; on several occasions the big, strapping
George had burst into tears. “Nobody can’t speck to win
every fight, don’ know how many times I got to tell you dat!”
said Mingo.
Mingo also decided to let the boy know that for several
months he had been aware that George had been
disappearing not long after full darkness fell, then returning
very late, recently close to daybreak. Uncle Mingo was sure
it had a connection with George’s having once mentioned,
with elaborate casualness, that while he had been at the
gristmill with Massa Lea one day, he had met a pretty and
nearly high-yaller big-house maid named Charity from the
adjacent plantation. “All dese years down here, dese of
ears an’ eyes o’ mine’s like a cat’s. I knowed de first night
you slipped off,” Uncle Mingo said to his astounded
apprentice. “Now, I ain’t one to poke in nobody’s business,
but I’se gwine tell you sump’n. You jes’ be mighty sho’ you
ain’t cotched by some dese po’ white paterollers,’cause if
dey don’t beat you half to death deyself, dey’ll bring you
back, an’ don’t you think massa won’t lay his whip crost yo’
ass!” Uncle Mingo stared for a while across the grassy
pasture before he spoke again. “You notice I ain’t said quit
slippin’ off?”
“Yassuh,” said George humbly.

During another silence, Mingo sat down on a favorite
stump of his, leaned slightly forward, and crossed his legs,
with his hands clasped around his knees. “Boy! I ’members
back when I first foun’ out what gals was, too—” and a new
light crept into Uncle Mingo’s eyes as the aged features
softened. “It was dis here long, tall gal, she was still new to
de county when her massa bought a place right next to my
massa’s.” Uncle Mingo paused, smiling. “Bes’ I can ’scribe
’er, well, de niggers older’n me commence to callin’ ’er
‘Blacksnake’—” Uncle Mingo went on, his smile growing
wider and wider the more he remembered—and he
remembered plenty. But George was too chagrined at
being caught to be embarrassed by anything Mingo was
telling him. It was pretty clear though that he had
underestimated the old man in more ways than one.

CHAPTER 91
Walking up the road toward slave row one Sunday morning,
George sensed that something was wrong when he saw
that neither his mammy nor any of the others were standing
around Kizzy’s cabin to greet him, as they had never failed
to do before in the four years he’d spent with Uncle Mingo.
Quickening his pace, he reached his mammy’s cabin and
was about to knock when the door was snatched open and
Kizzy practically jerked him inside, quickly shutting the door
behind them, her face taut with fear.
“Is missis seed you?”
“Ain’t seed her, Mammy! What’s the matter?”
“Lawd, boy! Massa got word some free nigger over in
Charleston, South Ca’liny, name o’ Denmark Vesey, had
hunnuds o’ niggers ready to kill no tellin’ how many white
folks right tonight, if dey hadn’t o’ got caught. Massa ain’t
long lef’ here actin’ like he gone wild, a-wavin’ his shotgun
an’ threatenin’ to kill anybody missy see outside dey cabins
fo’ he git back from some big organizin’ meetin’!”
Kizzy slid alongside the cabin’s wall until she could look
through the cabin’s single window toward the big house.
“She ain’t still where she was peepin’ from! Maybe she
seen you comin’ an’ went an’ hid!” The absurdity of Missis
L e a hiding from him struck some of Kizzy’s alarm into
George. “Run back down wid dem chickens, boy. No tellin’
what massa do he catch you up here!”
“I gwine stay here an’ talk to massa, Mammy!” He was
thinking that in such an extremity as this, he would even
somehow indirectly remind the massa whose father he
was, which should curb his anger, at least somewhat.
“You plum crazy? Git outa here!” Kizzy was shoving
George toward the cabin door. “ G’wan! Git! Mad as he was,
he catch you here, jes’ make it wuss on us. Slip through
dem bushes behin’ de toilet ’til you’s out’n sight o’ missy!”
Kizzy seemed on the verge of hysteria. The massa must
have been worse than he’d ever been before to terrify her

so. “Awright, Mammy,” he said finally. “But I ain’t slippin’
through no bushes. I ain’t done nothin’ to nobody. I’se gwine
back down de road jes’ same as I come up it.”
“Awright, awright, jes’ go ’head!”
Returning to the gamefowl area, George had barely
finished telling Uncle Mingo what he had heard, fearing that
he sounded foolish, when they heard a horse galloping up.
Within moments Massa Lea sat glowering down at them
from his saddle, the reins in one hand, his shotgun in the
other, and he directed the cold fury of his words at George.
“My wife saw you, so y’all know what happened.”
“Yassuh—” gulped George, staring at the shotgun.
Then, starting to dismount, Massa Lea changed his
mind, and staying on his horse, his face mottled with his
anger, he told them, “Plenty good white people would be
dyin’ tonight if one nigger hadn’t told his massa just in time.
Proves you never can trust none of you niggers!” Massa
Lea gestured with the shotgun. “Ain’t no tellin’ what’s in
y’all’s heads off down here by yourselves! But you just let
me half think anything funny, I’ll blow your heads off quick as
a rabbit’s!” Glaring balefully at Uncle Mingo and George,
Massa Lea wheeled his horse and galloped back up the
road.
A few minutes passed before Uncle Mingo even moved.
Then he spat viciously and kicked away the hickory strips
he had been weaving into a gamecock carrying basket.
“Work a thousan’ years for a white man you still any nigger!”
he exclaimed bitterly. George didn’t know what to say.
Opening his mouth to speak again, then closing it, Mingo
went toward his cabin, but turning at the door, he looked
back at George. “Hear me, boy! You thinks you’s sump’n
special wid massa, but nothin’ don’t make no difference to
mad, scared white folks! Don’t you be no fool an’ slip off
nowhere till this blow over, you hear me? I mean don’t!”
“Yassuh!”
George picked up the basket Mingo had been working
on and sat down on a nearby stump. His fingers began to
weave the hickory strips together as he tried to collect his
thoughts. Once again Uncle Mingo had managed to divine

exactly what was going on inside his head.
George grew angry for permitting himself to believe that
Massa Lea would ever act like anything but a massa
toward him. He should have known better by now how
anguishing—and fruitless—it was to even think about the
massa as his pappy. But he wished desperately that he
knew someone he felt he could talk with about it. Not Uncle
Mingo—for that would involve admitting to Uncle Mingo that
he knew the massa was his pappy. For the same reason,
he could never talk to Miss Malizy, Sister Sarah, or Uncle
Pompey. He wasn’t sure if they knew about the massa and
his mammy, but if one did, then they all would, because
whatever anyone knew got told, even when it was about
each other, behind each other’s backs, and he and Kizzy
would be no exception.
He couldn’t even raise the agonizing subject with his
mammy—not after her fervently remorseful apologies for
telling him about it in the first place.
After all these years, George wondered what his mammy
really felt about the whole excruciating thing, for by now, as
far as he could see, she and the massa acted as if they
were no longer aware that the other existed, at least in that
way. It shamed George even to think about his mammy
having been with the massa as Charity—and more recently
Beulah—would be with him on those nights when he
slipped away from the plantation.
But then, seeping up from the recesses of his memory,
came the recollection of a night long ago, when he was
three or four years old and awakened one night feeling that
the bed was moving, then lying still and terrified with his
eyes staring wide in the darkness, listening to the rustle of
the cornshucks and the grunting of the man who lay there
beside him jerking up and down on top of his mammy. He
had lain there in horror until the man got up; heard the dull
plink of a coin on the tabletop, the sound of footfalls, the
slam of the cabin door. For a seemingly interminable time,
George had fought back scalding tears, keeping his eyes
tightly closed, as if to shut out what he had heard and seen.
But it would always come back like a wave of nausea

whenever he happened to notice on a shelf in his mother’s
cabin a glass jar containing maybe an inch of coins. As
time passed, the depth of coins increased, until finally he no
longer could bring himself to look directly at the jar. Then
when he was around ten years old, he noticed one day that
the jar was no longer there. His mammy had never
suspected that he knew anything about it, and he vowed
that she never would.
Though he was too proud ever to mention it, George had
once considered talking with Charity about his white father.
He thought she might understand. The opposite of Beulah,
who was as black as charcoal, Charity was a considerably
lighter mulatto than George; in fact, she had the tan skin
that very black people liked to call “high yaller.” Not only did
Charity seem to harbor no distress whatever about her
color, she had laughingly volunteered to George that her
pappy was the white overseer on a big South Carolina rice
and indigo plantation with over a hundred slaves where she
had been born and reared until at eighteen she was sold at
auction and bought by Massa Teague to be their big-house
maid. On the subject of skin color, about all that Charity had
ever expressed any concern about was that in South
Carolina she had left behind her mammy and a younger
brother who was practically white. She said that blackskinned young’uns had unmercifully teased him until their
mammy told him to yell back at his tormentors, “Turkey
buzzard laid me! Hot sun hatched me! Gawd gim’me dis
color dat ain’t none o’ y’all black niggers’ business!” From
that time on, Charity said, her brother had been let alone.
But the problem of George’s own color—and how he got
it—was eclipsed for the moment by his frustration at
realizing that the near-uprising in faraway Charleston was
surely going to delay his following through with an idea he
had been developing carefully in his head for a long time. In
fact, nearly two years had gone into his finally reaching a
decision to try it out on Uncle Mingo. But there was no
sense in telling him about it now, since the whole thing
would hang on whether or not Massa Lea would approve of
the idea, and he knew Massa Lea was going to remain

angrily unapproachable about anything for quite a while.
Though the massa stopped carrying the shotgun after a
week or so, he would inspect the gamefowl only briefly
every day, and after terse instructions to Uncle Mingo,
would ride off as grim-faced as he had come.
George didn’t really realize the full gravity of what had
almost happened in Charleston until, after another two
weeks—despite Uncle Mingo’s warning—he found himself
unable to resist any longer the temptation to slip out for a
visit with one of his girl-friends. Impulsively, he decided to
favor Charity this time, swayed by memories of what a
tigress she always was with him. After waiting to hear Uncle
Mingo’s snoring, he went loping for nearly an hour across
the fields until he reached the concealing pecan grove from
which he always whistled his whippoorwill call to her. When
he’d whistled four times without seeing the familiar “come
ahead” signal of a lighted candle waved briefly in Charity’s
window, he began to worry. Just when he was about to
leave his hiding place and sneak on in anyway, he saw
movement in the trees ahead of him. It was Charity. George
rushed forward to embrace her, but she permitted him only
the briefest hug and kiss before pushing him away.
“What’sa matter, baby?” he demanded, so aroused by
her musky body aroma that he hardly heard the quavering
in her voice.
“You de bigges’ fool, slippin’ roun’ now, many niggers as
gittin’ shot by paterollers!”
“Well, le’s git on in yo’ cabin, den!” said George, throwing
an arm around her waist. But she moved away again.
“You act like you ain’t even heared ’bout no uprisin’!”
“I know was one, dat’s all—”
“I tell you ’bout it, den” and Charity said she overheard
her massa and missis saying that the ringleader, a Biblereading free black Charleston carpenter named Denmark
Vesey, had spent years in planning before confiding in four
close friends who helped him to recruit and organize
hundreds of the city’s free and slave blacks. Four heavily
armed groups of them had only awaited the signal to seize
arsenals and other key buildings, while others would burn

all they could of the city and kill every white they saw. Even
a horse company of black drivers would go dashing wildly
about in drays, carts, and wagons to confuse and obstruct
white people from assembling. “But dat Sunday mornin’
some scairt nigger tol’ his massa what s’posed to happen
dat midnight, den white mens was all over, catchin’, beatin’,
an’ torturin’ niggers to tell who was de uprisers. Dey’s done
hung over thirty of ’em by now, an’ ever’where dey’s
throwin’ de fear o’ Gawd into niggers, jes’ like dey’s doin’
roun’ here now, but ’specially in South Ca’liny. Done run out
Charleston’s free niggers an ’burnt dey houses, de nigger
preachers, too, an’ locked up dey churches, claimin’ dat
’stid o’ preachin’, dey’s been teachin’ niggers to read an’
write—”
George had renewed his efforts to start her moving
toward the cabin. “Ain’t you been listenin’ to me?” she said,
highly agitated. “You git home fo’ you’s seed an’ shot by
some dese paterollers!”
George protested that inside her cabin was safety from
any paterollers, as well as relief of his passion for her,
which had caused him to risk being shot already.
“Done tol’ you, NAW!”
Exasperated, George finally shoved her roughly
backward. “Well, g’wan, den!” And bitterly he went loping
back the way he had come, wishing furiously that he had
gone to Beulah’s instead, because it was too late to go
there now.
In the morning, George said to Mingo, “Went up to see
my mammy las’ night, an’ Miss Malizy was tellin’ me what
she been hearin’ massa tellin’ missis ’bout dat uprisin’—”
Unsure if Mingo would believe that story, he went on
anyway, telling what Charity had said, and the old man
listened intently. Finishing, George asked, “How come
niggers herebouts gittin’ shot at ’bout sump’n clear in South
Ca’liny, Uncle Mingo?”
Uncle Mingo thought awhile before he said, “All white
folks scairt us niggers sometime gwine organize an’ rise up
together—” He snorted derisively. “But niggers ain’t gwine
never do nothin’ together.” He reflected for another

moment. “But dis here shootin’ an’ killin’ you talk ’bout
gwine ease up like it always do, soon’s dey’s kilt an’ scairt
niggers enough, an’ soon’s dey makes whole passel o’
new laws, an’ soon’s dey gits sick of payin’ whole bunch o’
pecker-wood paterollers.”
“How long all dat take?” asked George, realizing as soon
as he had said it what a foolish question it was, and Uncle
Mingo’s quick look at him affirmed the opinion.
“Well, I sho’ ain’t got no answer to dat!” George fell silent,
deciding not to tell Uncle Mingo his idea until things had
returned to normal with Massa Lea.
In the course of the next couple of months, Massa Lea
gradually did begin to act more or less like his old self—
surly, most of the time, but not dangerous. And one day
soon afterward George decided that the time was right.
“Uncle Mingo, I been studyin’ a long time on sump’n—”
he began. “I b’lieves I got a idea might help massa’s birds
win mo’ fights dan dey does.” Mingo looked as if some
special form of insanity had struck his strapping seventeenyear-old assistant, who continued talking. “I been five years
gwine to de big chicken fights wid y’all. Reckon two
seasons back, I commence noticin’ sump’n I been watchin’
real close every since. Seem like every different
gamecocker massa’s set o’ birds got dey own fightin’ style
—” Scuffing the toe of one brogan against the other,
George avoided looking at the man who had been training
gamefowl since long before he was born. “We trains
massa’s birds to be real strong, wid real long wind, to win a
lot dey fights jes’ by outlastin’ de other birds. But I done
kept a count—de mos’ times we loses is when some bird
flies up over massa’s bird an’ gaffs ’im from de top, gin’ly in
de head. Uncle Mingo, I b’lieves if ’n massa’s birds got
stronger wings, like I b’lieves we could give ’em wid whole
lot o’ special wing exercise, I b’lieves dey’d gin’ly fly
higher’n other birds, an’ kill even mo’ dan dey does now.”
Beneath his wrinkled brow; Mingo’s deep-set eyes
searched the grass between George’s and his own shoes.
It was awhile before he spoke. “I sees what you means. I
b’lieves you needs to tell massa.”

“If you feels so, cain’t you tell him?”
“Naw. You thunk it up. Massa hear it from you good as
me.”
George felt an immense sense of relief that at least
Uncle Mingo didn’t laugh at the idea, but lying awake on his
narrow cornshuck mattress that night, George felt uneasy
and afraid about telling Massa Lea.
Bracing himself on Monday morning when the massa
appeared, George took a deep breath and repeated
almost calmly what he had said to Uncle Mingo, and he
added more detail about different gameflocks’
characteristic fighting styles “—An’ when you notices,
Massa, dem birds o’ Massa Graham’s fights in a fast, feisty
way. But Massa MacGregor’s birds fights real cautious an’
wary-like. Or Cap’n Peabody’s strikes wid dey feets an’
spurs close together, but Massa Howaid’s scissors wid dey
legs pretty wide apart. Dat rich Massa Jewett’s birds, dey
gin’ly fights low in de air, an’ dey pecks hard when dey’s on
de groun’, an’ any bird dey catches a good beakhold o’ jes’
liable to git gaffed right dere—” Avoiding the massa’s face,
George missed his intensely attentive expression. “Reckon
what I’se trying’ to say, Massa, if you ’grees wid me an’
Uncle Mingo givin’ yo’ birds some whole lotsa strong wing
exercisin’ dat we oughta be able to figger out, seem like
dat help ’em to fly up higher’n de res’ to gaff ’em from on
top, an’ speck nobody wouldn’t quick catch on.”
Massa Lea was staring at George as if he had never
seen him before.
In the months that remained before the next cockfighting
season, Massa Lea spent more time than ever before in
the gamefowl training area, observing and sometimes even
joining Uncle Mingo and George as they tossed
gamecocks higher and higher into the air. Descending with
a frantic flapping of their wings, trying to support their fiveto-six-pound weights, their wings grew steadily stronger.
As George had prophesied, the 1823 cockfighting
season opened and progressed through one after another
“main” contest, with no one seeming to detect how-or-why
the Lea birds were managing to win an even higher

percentage of their fights than the year before. Their steel
gaffs had sunk fatally into thirty-nine of their fifty-two
opponents by the end of the season.
One morning about a week later, Massa Lea arrived—in
high spirits—to check on the recovery of the half dozen of
his prime birds that had been injured seriously during the
season.
“Don’t b’lieve dis’n gwine pull through, Massa,” said
Uncle Mingo, indicating one so drooping and battered that
Massa Lea’s head quickly shook in agreement. “But I
speck dese in dese next two cages gwine heal up so good
you be fightin’ ’em again next season.” Mingo gestured next
at the last three convalescing birds. “Dese here ain’t gwine
never be perfect enough fo’ de big main fights no mo’, but
we can use ’em as catchcocks if you wants to, Massa, or
dey be good cull birds anyhow.” Massa Lea expressed his
satisfaction with the prognosis and had started toward his
horse when, turning, he spoke casually to George. “These
nights you slip out of here tomcattin’, you’d better be mighty
careful about that bad nigger that’s sweet on the same gal
—”
George was so dumfounded it took a full second before
anger flared within him at Uncle Mingo’s obvious treachery.
But then he saw that Uncle Mingo’s face was no less
astounded, as the massa continued. “Missis Teague told
my wife at their quilting club meeting she couldn’t figure out
what had come over her yaller house-maid until lately some
of the other niggers told her the gal’s wore out from twotiming you and some bad buck older nigger—” Massa Lea
chuckled. “Reckon the two of y’all sure must be tearin’ up
that gal!”
Charity! Two-timing! As George recalled furiously with
what insistence she had blocked him from her cabin that
night, he forced himself to smile and laugh nervously; Uncle
Mingo joined in just as hollowly. George felt stricken. Now
that the massa had discovered that he had been slipping
off nights, what was he going to do to him?
Having paused to let George expect his anger, Massa
Lea said instead—in an incredible, almost man-to-man

way—“Hell, long as you do your work, go on and chase you
some tail. Just don’t let some buck slice you to pieces—
and don’t get caught out on that road where the patrol is
shootin’ people’s niggers.”
“Nawsuh! Sho’ ain’t—” George was so confused he
didn’t know what to say. “Sho’ ’preciates, Massa—”
Massa Lea climbed on his horse, a discernible shaking
of his shoulders suggesting to his gamecock trainers that
he was laughing to himself as he cantered on up the road.
Finally alone in his shack that night, after enduring Uncle
Mingo’s frostiness through the rest of the day, free at last to
vent his outrage at Charity, George cursed her—and vowed
that he would turn his attentions, which she obviously didn’t
deserve, to the surely more faithful, if less hotly passionate,
Beulah. He also remembered that tall, cinnamon-colored
girl who had given him the eye at a secret frolic he had
stumbled on in the woods while hurrying homeward one
night. The only reason he hadn’t tried her then and there
was he got so drunk on the white lightning she offered him
that he was barely able to stagger home by dawn. But he
remembered she said her name was Ophelia and that she
belonged to the very rich Massa Jewett, who owned over a
thousand gamefowl, or so it was said, and whose family
had huge plantations in Georgia and South Carolina as well
as the one there in Caswell County. It was a long way to
walk, but first chance he got, George decided he was going
to get better acquainted with that tasty-looking field girl
Massa Jewett probably didn’t even know he owned.

CHAPTER 92
One Sunday morning George had left for his weekly visit on
slave row by the time Massa Lea showed up for daily
inspection of the flock. It was the perfect moment. After
walking about and talking of gamecocking for a while,
Uncle Mingo said, as if it had just occurred to him, “Massa,
you knows how every season we culls out dese fifteen or
twenty good birds dat’s better’n a whole lots o’ folks fights
wid. I b’lieves you can make good side money if’n you lets
dat boy fight yo’ culls in hackfights.”
Uncle Mingo knew well that the name of Tom Lea,
throughout the length and breadth of Caswell County,
symbolized the rise of a poor white man to eminence and a
major gamecocker who started out as a hackfighter with
one good bird. Many a time he had told Uncle Mingo how
fondly he looked back upon those early, hungry days,
declaring that their excitements were at least the equal of
those he had enjoyed in all of the major “mains” he had
competed in ever since. The only significant differences,
Massa Lea said, were that the big “main” fights involved a
better class of people as well as of gamecocks, and much
higher amounts of money were wagered; one might see
really rich gamecockers winning—and losing—fortunes in
the course of a single fight. Hackfights were for those who
were able to fight only one or two or three usually secondor third-rate birds—the poor whites, free blacks, or slaves
whose pocketbooks could afford bets ranging from twentyfive cents to a dollar, with as much as perhaps twenty
dollars being bet only when some hackfighter went out of
his head and put on the line everything he had in the world.
“What makes you think he can handle birds in a cockpit?”
asked Massa Lea.
Uncle Mingo was relieved to hear no objections to his
proposal. “Well, suh, close as you know dat boy watch
fights, reckon he ain’t missed a move you made in de
cockpits for five, six years, Massa. An’ put dat togedder

wid jes’ how na’chel born he is wid roosters, I sho’ b’lieves
he’d need no mo’n a little teachin’. Even fights he’d lose be
jes’ cull birds we has roun’ here dat you don’t never hardly
use nohow, suh.”
“Uh-huh,” the massa murmured, rubbing his chin
thoughtfully. “Well, I don’t see nothin’ wrong with it. Why
don’t you buff the spurs of some culls and help him practice
fights across the summer? If he looks any good by next
season, yeah, I’ll stake him a little for some bets.”
“Sho will, yassuh!” Uncle Mingo was exultant, since for
months now in the gamefowl area’s woodsy privacy, he and
George had been mock-fighting culled birds, their spurs
harmlessly covered with a light leather pouch Uncle Mingo
had devised. Being the cautious man he was, the old man
hadn’t ventured his suggestion to the massa without first
ascertaining for himself that his able apprentice showed
genuine potential to develop into a really good fight handler.
With enough hackfighting experience, he thought privately
that George might someday become as expert as Massa
Lea at handling birds at a cockpit. As Uncle Mingo had
said, even the culls from a flock as good as the massa’s
were superior to the ones usually pitted in the many
hackfights that were staged each season in various
impromptu and informal settings around the county. All in
all, it seemed to Uncle Mingo that there was practically no
way George would miss.
“Well, boy, you jes’ gwine stand dere wid yo’ mouth
open?” asked Uncle Mingo when he broke the news that
afternoon.
“Don’t know what to say.”
“Never thought I’d live to see de day when you ain’t got
nothin’ to say.”
“I ... jes’ don’ know how to thank you.”
“Wid all dem teeth showin’, you don’ need to. Le’s get to
work.”
Every day that summer, he and Uncle Mingo spent at
least an hour in the late afternoons squatting on opposite
sides of a make-shift cockpit, smaller in diameter and
shallower than the regular size, but still sufficient for training.

After several weeks, the massa came down to observe one
of the sessions. Impressed with the pit-side agility and
keen reflexes George showed in handling his bird, he gave
him a few cockfight pointers of his own.
“You want your bird to get the jump. Now watch me—”
Taking over Mingo’s bird, he said, “Okay, your referee’s
already hollered ‘Get ready!’ You’re down here holding your
bird—but don’t watch it! Keep your eyes on that referee’s
lips! You want to tell the split second he’s going to say ‘Pit!’
It ’s when his lips press together tight—” Massa Lea
compressed his own lips. “Right then snatch up your hands
—you’ll hear ‘Pit ’ just as your bird gets out there first!”
Some afternoons, after their training session was done
and the cull birds they had used had been put back in their
pens, Uncle Mingo would sit and tell George about the glory
and the money that could be earned in hackfights. “Jes’ like
de po’ peckerwoods hollers for massa to win, I’se seed
niggers dat gits hollered for at de big hackfights. An’ it’s
much as ten, twelve, even mo’ dollars can be winned in one
fight, boy!”
“Ain’t never had a dollar, Uncle Mingo! Don’t hardly know
what a dollar look like!”
“I aint never had many neither. Fact, ain’t got no use for
none no mo’. But massa say he gwine stake you some
bettin’ money, an’ if you wins any, he jes’ might let you have
some of it—”
“You reckon he do dat?”
“I specks, ’cause I know he got to be feelin’ pretty good
’bout dat wing-strengthenin’ idea of your’n what done put
good money in his pocket. Thing is if he do, is you gwine
have sense enough to save up what you git?”
“Sho’ do dat! I sho’ would!”
“I’se even heared o’ niggers winnin’ an’ savin’ enough
from hackfightin’ to buy deyselves free from dey massas.”
“Buy me an’ my mammy both!”
Immediately Uncle Mingo rose from the stump he had
been sitting on; the lancing of jealousy that he had just
experienced had not only come entirely unexpectedly, but it
was also so unsettling deep within him that he found it hard

to make any reply. Then he heard himself snapping, “Well—
reckon ain’t nothin’ impossible!” Wanting suddenly to get
away from a feeling that his own sense of sharing a truly
close affection wasn’t being equally reciprocated, he
walked quickly off toward his cabin, leaving George staring
after him, puzzled.
At a big cockfight main with Massa Lea early during the
1824 season, Uncle Mingo heard from an old trainer he
had known for years that a hackfight was due to be held
that coming Saturday afternoon behind the large barn of a
local plantation. “Reckon he’bout ready as he ever gwine
be, Massa,” Mingo told the massa later. On Saturday
morning, as he had promised, Massa Lea came down and
counted out twenty dollars in small bills and coins to Uncle
Mingo. “Now, you know my policy,” he said to both of them.
“Don’t get in there fightin’ a bird if you’re afraid to bet on
him! If you bet nothin’ you’ll never win nothin’! I’m willin’ to
lose whatever you lose, but I’m puttin’ up the money and
you’re fightin’ my chickens, so I want half of any winnin’s,
you understand that? And if I even think there’s any messin’
around with my money, I’ll take it out of both your black
hides!” But they could clearly see that he was only putting
on a gruff act when he was really in a good humor as they
chorused, “Yassuh, Massa!”
Rounding the corner of the large gray-painted barn, trying
not to show how excited he was, George saw about twenty
black hackfighters moving around, laughing and talking on
one side of a wide, shallow cockpit. Recognizing about half
of them from the big fights they’d attended with their
massas, as he had, he waved and smiled his greetings,
exchanging nods with others whose colorful dress and
cockily independent air made him guess that they must be
free blacks. Flicking glances at about an equal number of
poor whites just across the cockpit, he was surprised to
find that he knew some of them, too, and pridefully, he
overheard one telling another, “Them two’s Tom Lea’s
niggers.” Both the black and white hackfighters soon began
untying their hay-filled crocus bags, withdrawing their
crowing, clucking birds and starting to limber them up as

Uncle Mingo stepped around the cockpit and said
something to the stout, ruddy-faced referee, who nodded
with a glance across at George.
The boy was diligently massaging his stag when Mingo
returned and began working on the other bird they’d
brought along. George felt vaguely uneasy at being
physically closer than ever before to poor whites, who
generally meant nothing but trouble for blacks, but he
reminded himself that Uncle Mingo had told him on their
way over here that hackfighting was the only thing he knew
of that poor whites and blacks did together. The rule was
that only two whites or two blacks fought their birds against
each other, but anyone freely could bet on or against any
bird in any fight.
With his bird well massaged and limbered up and
nestled back in its sack, George drank in more of the
surrounding hubbub, and he saw yet more hackfighters with
filled sacks hurrying toward the barn when the referee
began waving his arms.
“All right, all right now! Let’s get started fightin’ these
birds! Jim Carter! Ben Spence! Get over here and heel ’em
up!”
Two gaunt, shabbily dressed white men came forward,
weighed-in their birds, then fitted on the steel gaffs amid
sporadic shouted bets of twenty-five and fifty cents. As far
as George was concerned, neither bird looked any better
than mediocre compared to the two culls from the massa’s
flock in his and Uncle Mingo’s sacks.
At the cry “Pit!” the birds rushed out, burst into the air,
and dropped back down, flurrying and feinting—fighting
conventionally, George felt, and without the quality of drama
he always sensed with Uncle Mingo and the massa at the
big fights. When at last one bird hung a gaff that badly
wounded the other in the neck, it took minutes more to
finish the kill that George knew would have taken a topclass bird only seconds. He watched the losing owner stalk
off bitterly cursing his bad luck and holding his dead bird by
the legs. In a second fight, then in a third, neither the
winning nor losing birds showed George the fight fire and

style he was used to seeing, so diminishing his
nervousness that as the fourth fight wore on, he all but
cockily anticipated his own turn in the cockpit. But when it
came, his heart immediately started pounding faster.
“All right, all right! Now Mr. Roames’ nigger with a
speckled gray, and Mr. Lea’s nigger with a red bird! Y’all
boys heel ’em up!” George had recognized his stocky black
opponent when they arrived; in fact, several times over the
past few years they had talked briefly at the big main fights.
Now, feeling Uncle Mingo’s eyes fastened on him, George
went through the weighing-in and then kneeled, unbuttoning
the bib pocket of his overalls and pulling out the wrapped
gaffs. Tying them onto his rooster’s legs, he remembered
Mingo’s admonition, “not too loose or dey can git looser an’
slide down, an’ not too tight less’n dey numbs an’ cramps
his legs.” Hoping that he was achieving just the right
tightness, George heard around him the cries, “Fifty cents
on de red!” ... “Covered!” ... “Dollar on de gray!” ... “Got
dat!” “Fo’ dollars on de red!” It was Uncle Mingo, barking
out by far the biggest bet, triggering a quick rash of cries to
cover him. George could feel the excitement of the crowd
increasing along with his own. “Get ready!”
George kneeled, holding his rooster firmly against the
ground, feeling its body vibrating in its anxiety to burst into
attack.
“Pit!”
He had forgotten to watch the referee’s lips! By the time
his hands jerked up, the other bird was already blurring into
motion. Scrambling backward, George watched in horror
as his bird got hit broadside and knocked tumbling off
balance, then gaffed in the right side with such swiftness
and force that it was sent reeling. But recovering quickly, it
turned to the attack as a patch of feathers began to darken
with blood. The two birds flurried upward, his own flying
higher, but its gaffs somehow missed on the way down.
Feinting, they went up again, about evenly high this time,
both of their gaffs flashing faster than anyone’s eyes could
follow. George’s heart skipped beats for endless minutes
as the birds pecked, feinted, lunged, and leaped all over

the cockpit. He knew his rooster had to be weakening from
its steady loss of blood, even as it kept countering the
rushes of the spangled gray. Then suddenly, with the flash
of a spur, it was all over, and George’s bird lay quivering
and fluttering in its final throes. He scarcely heard the
bettors’ shouts and curses as he snatched his dying bird
from the cockpit. Tears bursting forth, he had pushed
through the crowd of astonished, staring men when Uncle
Mingo roughly seized his elbow and propelled him on
beyond where anyone else could hear.
“You’s actin’ like a fool!” he rasped. “Go git dat other bird
fo’ yo’ next fight!”
“I ain’t no good at it, Uncle Mingo. Done got massa’s bird
kilt!”
Mingo seemed incredulous. “Anytime birds fight one
gwine lose! Ain’t you never seen massa lose? Now git on
back out dere!” But neither his threats nor urgings were
sufficient to move the boy, and finally he stopped trying.
“Awright! I ain’t gwine back tellin’ massa we was scared to
try winnin’ his money back!”
Angrily, Uncle Mingo turned back toward the crowd
around the cockpit. Humiliated, George was surprised and
grateful that he was hardly noticed by the other
hackfighters, who had turned their attention to the next
contest. Two more fights passed before the referee cried
out again, “Tom Lea’s nigger!” In deeper shame, he heard
Mingo bet ten dollars and get it covered before the old man
pitted the second of the massa’s cull birds. It expertly killed
its opponent in less than two minutes.
Uncle Mingo’s efforts to console George as they trudged
back toward the plantation did little good. “We done made
two dollars, so how come you actin’ like sump’n dyin?”
“Jes’ so shame o’ losin—an’ reckon massa won’t hardly
want me losin’ no mo’ his birds—”
Mingo was so upset that his boy seemed determined to
become a loser even before he got started that after
George had moped around for three days, acting as if he
wanted the earth to open up and swallow him whole, he
spoke to Massa Lea about it. “Would you have a word with

dat boy, Massa? Seem like he think it a disgrace to lose
one fight!” When the massa next visited the gamefowl area,
he accosted George. “What’s this I hear you can’t lose a
fight?”
“Massa, jes’ feel terrible gittin’ yo’ bird kilt!”
“Well, I’ve got twenty more I want you to fight!”
“Yassuh.” He was halfhearted even with the massa’s
reassurance.
But when George won with both birds in his next
hackfight, he began to preen and crow like one of his
winning roosters. After proudly collecting his bets, Uncle
Mingo took him aside and whispered, “Git yo’ head big,
you be losin’ again!”
“Jes’ lemme hol’ all dat money, Uncle Mingo!” he
exclaimed, holding out his cupped hands.
As he stared at the pile of crumpled one-dollar bills and
more in coins, Mingo said laughingly, “You take de money
to massa. Do y’all both good!”
On their way home, George tried for what seemed the
hundredth time to persuade Uncle Mingo to visit the slave
row to meet his mammy, Miss Malizy, Sister Sarah, and
Uncle Pompey. “Massa ain’t got but de six o’ us niggers,
Uncle Mingo, look like de leas’ we could do is know one
’nother! Dey sho’ like to meet you. I talks ’bout you all de
time when I’se dere, but dey feels like you don’t like ’em or
sump’n!”
“You an’ dem both ought to know I can’t be ’gainst
nobody I don’t even know!” said Mingo. “Les’ jes’ keep it
like it been, den dey ain’t got to worry wid me, an’ me
neither wid dem!” And once again, when they reached the
plantation, Mingo took the path that would give him a wide
berth around slave row.
Kizzy’s eyes fairly bugged when she saw the bills and
coins in George’s palm. “Lawdy, boy, where you git all
dat?” she demanded, calling Sister Sarah to take a look.
“How much is dat, anyhow?” asked Sarah.
“Don’t know, ma’am, but plenty mo’ where it come from.”
Sister Sarah towed George by his free hand to show the
wind-fall to Uncle Pompey.

“Speck I better git me a rooster,” said the old man. “But
looka here, boy, dat’s massa’s money!”
“He gimme half!” George explained proudly. “Fact, I got
to go give him his share right now.”
Presenting himself at the kitchen, George showed Miss
Malizy the money, then asked to see the massa.
When Massa Lea pocketed his nine dollars’ winnings, he
laughed. “Hell, I think Mingo’s slippin’ you my best birds and
me the culls!”
George was beside himself!
In the next hackfight, George won with two birds he had
won with before, and Massa Lea grew so intrigued by
George’s string of victories that he finally ignored his selfimposed objections to attending a hackfight.
The massa’s unexpected arrival prompted hasty nudges
and whispers among both the white and black hackfighters.
Seeing even Uncle Mingo and George nervous and
uncertain, Massa Lea began to feel misgivings that he had
come. Then, realizing that any initiative must be his own, he
began grinning and waving at one of the older poor whites.
“Hi, Jim.” Then to another: “Hey there, Pete!” They grinned
back, astounded that he even remembered their names.
“Hey, Dave!” he went on. “See your wife kicked out the rest
of your teeth—or was it that bad whiskey?” Amid
uproarious laughter, the hackfight seemed nearly forgotten
as they crowded around the man who had started out as
poor as any of them and then became a legend for them.
Bursting with pride, George cradled his bird under one
arm, and astonishing Uncle Mingo as well as Massa Lea,
he was suddenly strutting around the edges of the cockpit.
“All right! All right!” he cried out loudly, “any y’all got any
money, git it on de line! Don’t care what you bets, if I can’t
cover it, my massa sho’ can, rich as he is!” Seeing the
massa smiling, George grew yet louder. “Dis here jes’ his
cull bird I’s fightin’, an’ he beat anything out here! C’mon!”
An hour later, after ballyhooing a second winning fight,
George had won twenty-two dollars and Massa Lea nearly
forty from accepting side bets pressed upon him. He really
hated to take the money from men whom he knew to be as

dirt poor as he once had been, but he knew they would go
the rest of the year boastfully lying how they had lost ten
times as much as they had in betting against Tom Lea.
The cocky, self-proclaiming George was missed when
he didn’t show up at four of Caswell County’s next
hackfights, for Uncle Mingo was suffering from another
siege of severe coughing spells. George saw how they
came on him suddenly, without warning, and then persisted,
and he felt he shouldn’t leave his old teacher alone with the
gamefowl, nor did he wish to go by himself. But even when
Mingo had improved somewhat, he said he still didn’t feel
quite up to walking all the way to the next hackfight—but he
demanded that George go anyway.
“You ain’t no baby! You sho’ be gone quick enough if it
was some gals dere!”
So George went alone, carrying in each hand a bulging
bag containing a gamecock cull. As he came into view of
the gamecockers who had been missing his recently
colorful presence, one of them cried loudly, “Look out! Here
come dat ‘Chicken George’!” There was a burst of laughter
from them all, and he heartily joined in.
The more he thought of it on his way home—with still
more winnings in his pocket—the better he liked the sound
of that name. It had a certain flair.
“Betcha none y’all can’t guess what dey done name me
at de hackfight!” he said the moment he arrived on slave
row.
“Naw, what?”
“Chicken George!”
“Do Lawd!” exclaimed Sister Sarah.
Kizzy’s love and pride shone from her eyes. “Well,” she
said, “it’s sho’ ’bout close as anybody gwine git to ’scribin’
you nowdays!”
The nickname even amused Massa Lea when he was
told it by Uncle Mingo, who added wryly, “Wonder to me
dey ain’t callin’ im ‘Cryin George,’ de way he still bust out
cryin’ anytime a bird he fightin’ git kilt. Much as he winnin’
nowdays, don’t make no difference! Jes’ let a killin’ gaff hit
his rooster an’ he gushin’ and blubberin’ an’ huggin’ dat

bird like it his own chile. Is you ever heared or seed de like
of dat befo’, Massa?”
Massa Lea laughed. “Well, plenty times I’ve felt like
crying myself when I’d bet a lot more’n I ought to and my
bird caught a gaff! But, no, I guess he’s the only one I’ve
heard of takin’ on like you say. I think he just gets too
attached to chickens.”
Not long afterward, at the biggest “main” of the year, the
massa was returning to the wagon, carrying his bird, which
had just won in the final contest, when he heard someone
shout, “Oh, Mr. Lea!” Turning, he was astonished to see the
gamecocker aristocrat George Jewett striding toward him,
smiling.
Massa Lea managed to make himself sound casual.
“Oh, yes, Mr. Jewett!”
Then they were shaking hands. “Mr. Lea, I’ll be very frank,
as one gentleman and gamecocker to another. I’ve recently
lost my trainer. The road patrol stopped him without a pass
the other night. Unfortunately, he tried to run and was shot,
badly. It’s not likely he’ll pull through.”
“Sorry to hear it—for you, I mean, not the nigger.” Massa
Lea cursed his confusion, guessing at what was coming.
The aristocrat wanted Mingo.
“Of course,” said Jewett. “So I find myself needing at
least a temporary trainer, one who knows at least
something about birds—” He paused. “I’ve noticed at our
cockfights you’ve got two of them. I wouldn’t think of wanting
your experienced older one, but I wonder if you would
entertain a fair offer for the other, the young one who’s
sparkin’ one of the gals on my place, my niggers tell me—”
Massa Lea’s astonishment mixed with fury at this
evidence of treachery by Chicken George. He sounded
choked: “Oh, I see!”
Massa Jewett smiled again, knowing he’d drawn blood.
“Let me prove I’m not wishing to engage us in bargaining.”
He paused. “Would three thousand be all right?”
Massa Lea was staggered, not sure if he had heard
right. “I’m sorry, Mr. Jewett,” he heard himself say flatly. He
felt the thrill of refusing a rich blueblood.

“All right.” Jewett’s voice tightened. “My final offer: four!”
“I’m just not selling my trainers, Mr. Jewett.”
The rich gamecocker’s face fell, his eyes had gone cold.
“I understand. Of course! Good day to you, sir!”
“The same to you, sir,” said Massa Lea, and they strode
away in opposite directions.
The massa returned to the wagon as quickly as he could
without running, his rage rising. Uncle Mingo and Chicken
George, seeing his face, sat with their own carefully blank.
Reaching the wagon, he brandished his fist at George, his
voice trembling with fury. “I’ll bash your brains in! What the
hell are you doin’ over at Jewett’s—tellin’ him how we train
chickens?”
Chicken George turned ashen. “Ain’t tol’ Massa Jewett
nothin’, Massa—” He could hardly speak. “Ain’t spoke nary
word to him, never, Massa!” His total astonishment and
fright half convinced Massa Lea. “You tryin’ to tell me you’re
goin’ way the hell over there just to tomcat with Jewett’s
wench?” Even if it was innocent, he knew how every visit
exposed his apprentice trainer to Jewett’s cunning, which
could lead to anything.
“Massa, Lawdy mercy—”
Another wagon now was pulling close by, with men
calling and waving to the massa. Returning their waves,
Massa Lea slitted his mouth into a smile and went
clambering up onto the fartherest edge of the wagon’s seat,
snapping at the terrified Uncle Mingo out of the corner of
his mouth, “Drive, goddammit!” A knife could have cut the
tension during the seemingly endless trip back to the
plantation. Nor was the tension much less taut between
Uncle Mingo and Chicken George during the rest of the
day. That night a sleepless George lay in a sweat of
anticipation over the punishment he knew was coming.
But none came. And a few days later the massa said to
Uncle Mingo, as if nothing had happened, “Next week I’ve
got a bid to fight birds just over the state line in Virginia. I
know that long ride wouldn’t do your coughing spells any
good, so I’ll just take the boy.”
“Yassuh, Massa.”

Uncle Mingo had long known this day was coming; that’s
why the massa had trained the boy to replace him. But he
hadn’t dreamed it would come so soon.

CHAPTER 93
“What you thinkin’ about so hard, boy?”
After more than an hour sharing the wagon’s seat and
watching the warm February morning’s fleecy clouds, the
dusty load stretching ahead, or the monotonously flexing
muscles of the mules’ rumps, Massa Lea’s sudden
question startled Chicken George.
“Nothin’,” he replied. “Wasn’t thinkin’ ’bout nothin’,
Massa.”
“Somethin’ I am’t never understood about you niggers!”
There was an edge in Massa Lea’s voice. “Man try to talk
to y’all decent, you right away start acting stupid. Makes me
madder’n hell, especially a nigger like you that talks his
head off if he wants to. Don’t you reckon white people
would respect you more if you acted like you had some
sense?”
Chicken George’s lulled mind had sprung to keen
alertness. “Dey might, den again some might not, Massa,”
he said carefully. “It all depen’.”
“There you go with that round-the-mulberry-bush talk.
Depend on what?”
Still parrying until he got a better idea of what the massa
was up to, Chicken George offered yet another meringue of
words. “Well, suh, I means like it depen’ on what white folks
you talkin’ to, Massa, leas’ways dat’s what I gits de
impression.”
Massa Lea spat disgustedly over the side of the wagon.
“Feed and clothe a nigger, put a roof over his head, give
him everything else he needs in this world, and that nigger’ll
never give you one straight answer!”
Chicken George risked a guess that the massa had
simply decided upon impulse to open some sort of
conversation with him, hoping to enliven what had become
a boring and seemingly endless wagon ride.
In order to stop irritating Massa Lea, he tested the water
by saying, “You wants de straight, up-an’-down truth,

Massa, I b’lieves mos’ niggers figger dey’s bein’ smart to
act maybe dumber’n dey really is, ’cause mos’ niggers is
scairt o’ white folks.”
“Scared!” exclaimed Massa Lea. “Niggers slick as eels,
that’s what! I guess it’s scared niggers plottin’ uprisings to
kill us every time we turn around! Poisonin’ white people’s
food, even killin’ babies! Anything you can name against
white people, niggers doin’ it all the time, and when white
people act to protect themselves, niggers hollerin’ they so
scared!”
Chicken George thought it would be wise to stop fiddling
with the massa’s hairtrigger temper. “Don’t b’lieve none on
yo’ place ever done nothin’ like dat, Massa,” he said
quietly.
“You niggers know I’d kill you if you did!” A gamecock
crowed loudly in its coop behind them, and some others
clucked in response.
George said nothing. They were passing a large
plantation, and he glanced across at a group of slaves
beating down the dead cornstalks in preparation for
plowing before the next planting.
Massa Lea spoke again. “It makes me sick to think how
tough niggers can make it for a man that’s worked hard all
his life tryin’ to build up somethin’.”
The wagon rolled on in silence for a while, but Chicken
George could feel the massa’s anger rising. Finally the
massa exclaimed, “Boy, let me tell you somethin’! You been
all your life on my place with your belly full. You don’t know
nothin’ about what it’s like to grow up scufflin’ and half
starvin’ with ten brothers and sisters and your mama and
papa all sleeping in two hot, leaky rooms!”
Chicken George was astonished at such an admission
from the massa, who went on heatedly as if he had to get
the painful memories out of his system. “Boy, I can’t
remember when my mama’s belly wasn’t big with another
baby. And my papa chawin’ his tobacco and half drunk
forever hollerin’ and cussin’ that none of us was workin’
hard enough to suit him on ten rocky acres that I wouldn’t
give fifty cents an acre for, where he called himself a

farmer!” Glaring at Chicken George, he said angrily, “You
want to know what changed my life?”
“Yassuh,” said George.
“This big faith-healer came. Everybody was runnin’
around excited about his big tent bein’ put up. The openin’
night everybody who could walk, even those who needed to
be carried, were overflowin’ that tent. Later on, people said
there had never been such a hellfire sermon and such
miracle cures in Caswell County. I never will forget the sight
of those hundreds of white people leapin’, screamin’,
shoutin’, and testifyin’. People fallin’ out in one ’nother’s
arms, moanin’ and twitchin’ and havin’ the jerks. Worse
than you’ll see at any nigger camp meetin’. But midst all
that ruckus and hoorah, there was one thing that somehow
or ’nother really hit me.” Massa Lea looked at Chicken
George. “You know anything about the Bible?”
“Not—well, nawsuh, not to speak of.”
“Bet you wouldn’t of thought I know nothin’ about it, either!
It was from the Psalms. I’ve got that place marked in my
own Bible. It says, “I have been young and now am old, yet
have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor His seed
beggin’ bread.”
“After that preacher was long gone, that sayin’ stuck in
my head. I turned it up and down and sideways tryin’ to
figure out what meanin’ it had for me. Everything I saw in my
family just translated to beggin’ bread. We didn’t have
nothin’, and we wasn’t goin’ go get nothin’. Finally it
seemed like that sayin’ meant if I made myself to get
righteous—in other words, if I worked hard, and lived the
best I knew how—I’d never have to beg for bread when I
was old.” The massa looked at Chicken George defiantly.
“Yassuh,” said Chicken George, not knowing what else to
say.
“That’s when I left home,” Massa Lea went on. “I was
eleven years old. I hit the road, askin’ any and everybody for
a job, doing anything, includin’ nigger work. I was ragged. I
ate scraps. I saved every cent I got, I mean for years, until I
finally bought my first twenty-five woodsland acres, along
with my first nigger, name of George. Fact, that’s who I

named you for—”
The massa seemed to expect some response. “Uncle
Pompey tol’ me ’bout ’im,” said Chicken George.
“Yeah. Pompey came along later, my second nigger.
Boy, you hear what I tell you, I worked shoulder to shoulder
alongside that George nigger, we slaved from can to can’t,
rootin’ up stumps and brush and rocks to plant my first crop.
It wasn’t nothin’ but the Lord that made me buy a twentyfive-cent lottery ticket, and that ticket won me my first
gamecock. Boy, that was the best bird I ever had! Even
when he got cut bad, I’d patch him up and he went on to win
more hackfights than anyone ever heard of one rooster
doin’.”
He paused. “Don’t know how come I’m sittin’ up here
talkin’ this way to a nigger. But I guess a man just need to
talk to somebody sometime.”
He paused again. “Can’t do no talkin’ to your wife, much.
Seem like once a woman catches a husband to take care
of them, they spend the rest of their lives either sick, restin’,
or complainin’ about somethin’, with niggers waitin’ on
them hand and foot. Or they’re forever pattin’ their faces
with powder till they look like ghosts—”
Chicken George couldn’t believe his ears. But the massa
couldn’t seem to stop himself. “Or then you can get the
other kind, like my family. I’ve wondered a lot of times why
none of my nine brothers and sisters didn’t fight to get away
like I did. They’re still scufflin’ and starvin’ just the same as
the day I left—only now they’ve all got their own families.”
Chicken George decided that he had best not
acknowledge with even a “Yassuh” anything the massa was
saying about his family, some of whom George had seen
briefly talking with the massa when they were at cockfights
or in town. Massa Lea’s brothers were dirt-poor crackers of
the sort that not only the rich planters but also even their
slaves sneered at. Time and again he had seen how
embarrassed the massa was to meet any of them. He had
overheard their constant whining about hard times and their
begging for money, and he had seen the hatred on their
faces when the massa gave them the fifty cents or a dollar

that he knew they were going to spend on white lightning.
Chicken George thought of how many times he had heard
Miss Malizy tell how, when the massa used to invite
members of his family home for dinner, they would eat and
drink enough to glut three times their own number, and the
moment he was out of earshot, would heap scorn on him as
if he were a dog.
“Any one of them could have done what I did!” Massa
Lea exclaimed beside him on the wagon seat. “But they
didn’t have the gumption, so the hell with them!” He fell
silent again—but not for long.
“One way or another, I’ve got things goin’ along pretty
good now—a respectable roof to live under, my hundred or
so gamebirds, and eighty-five acres with over half of it in
crops, along with the horse, mules, cows, and hogs. And
I’ve got you few lazy niggers.”
“Yassuh,” said Chicken George, thinking that it might be
reasonably safe to express in a mild way another point of
view. “But us niggers works hard for you, too, Massa. Long
as I been knowin’ my mammy an’ Miss Malizy an’ Sister
Sarah an’ Uncle Pompey an’ Uncle Mingo—ain’t dey been
workin’ fo’ you hard as dey can?” And before the massa
could reply, he tacked on something Sister Sarah had
mentioned during his visit to slave row the previous
Sunday. “Fact, Massa, ’ceptin for my mammy, ain’t none of
’em less’n fifty years ol’—” He stopped himself, not about to
add Sister Sarah’s conclusion that the massa was simply
too cheap to buy any younger slaves, apparently expecting
to work the few he had until they dropped dead.
“You must not have been payin’ attention to all I’ve been
tellin’ you, boy! Ain’t a nigger I got worked as hard as me!
So don’t come tellin’ me how hard niggers work!”
“Yassuh.”
“‘Yassuh’ what?”
“Jes’ yassuh. You sho’ work hard, too, Massa.”
“Damn right! You think it’s easy being responsible for
everything and everybody on my place? You think it’s easy
keepin’ up a big flock of chickens?”
“Nawsuh, I know for sho’ dat’s hard on you, Massa.”

George thought of Uncle Mingo’s having attended the
gameflock every day for more than thirty years—not to
mention his own seven. Then, as a ploy to emphasize
Mingo’s decades of service, he asked innocently, “Massa,
is you got any idea how ol’ is Uncle Mingo?”
Massa Lea paused, rubbing his chin. “Hell, I really don’t
know. Let’s see, I once figured he’s around fifteen years
older’n I am—that would put him somewhere up in his early
sixties. And gettin’ older everyday. Seems like he’s gettin’
sick more and more every year. How does he seem to,
you? You’re livin’ down there around him.”
Chicken George’s mind flashed to Uncle Mingo’s recent
bout of coughing, the worst one he had ever yet suffered, as
far as he knew. Remembering how Miss Malizy and Sister
Sarah often declared that the massa viewed any claim of
sickness on their part as sheer laziness, he said finally,
“Well, Massa, mos’ de time seem like he feelin’ fine, but I
b’lieves you really ought to know he do git real bad coughin’
spells sometimes—so bad I gits scared, ’cause he jes’ like
a daddy to me.”
Catching himself too late, instantly he sensed a hostile
reaction. A bump in the road set the cooped gamecocks
clucking again, and for several moments the wagon rolled
on before Massa Lea demanded, “What’s Mingo done so
much for you? Was it him took you out of the fields and sent
you down there with a shack for yourself?”
“Nawsuh, you done all dat, Massa.”
They rode on in silence for a while until the massa
decided to speak again. “I hadn’t much thought about what
you said there back a ways, but now that you mention it, I
really got me a bunch of old niggers. Some of ’em bound to
start breakin’ down on me anytime now, goddammit! Much
as niggers cost nowadays, I’m goin’ to have to buy one or
two younger field hands!” He turned as if accosting Chicken
George. “You see what I’m talking about, the kind of things I
have to worry about all the time?”
“Yassuh, Massa.”
“‘Yassuh, Massa!’ That’s the nigger answer to
everything!”

“You sho’ wouldn’t want no nigger disagreein’ wid you,
suh.”
“Well, can’t you find somethin’ to say besides ‘Yassuh,
Massa’?”
“Nawsuh—I means, well, suh, leas’ you got some money
to buy niggers wid, Massa. Dis season you winned so
good in de cockfights.” Chicken George was hoping to
move the conversation onto a safer subject. “Massa,” he
asked guilelessly, “is it any gamecockers ain’t got no farm
atall? I means don’t raise no crops, jes’ nothin’ but
chickens?”
“Hmmmm. Not that I know of, unless it’s some of those
city slickers, but I never heard of any of them with enough
birds to be called serious gamecockers.” He thought for a
moment. “In fact, it’s usually the more gamecocks, the
bigger the farm—like that Mr. Jewett’s place where you’ve
been tomcattin’.”
Chicken George could have kicked himself for handing
the massa that kind of an opening, and he quickly sought to
close it. “Ain’t been over dere no mo’, Massa.”
After a pause, Massa Lea said, “Found you another
wench somewhere else, huh?”
Chicken George hesitated before replying. “I stays close
now, Massa.” Which avoided a direct lie.
Massa Lea scoffed. “Big, strapping twenty-year-old buck
like you? Boy, don’t tell me you’re not slippin’ around nights
gettin’ plenty of that good hot tail! Hell, I could hire you out to
stud; bet you’d like that!” The massa’s face creased into a
half leer. “Good friend of mine says them black wenches
got plenty good hot tail, now tell me the truth, ain’t that right,
boy?”
Chicken George thought of the massa with his mammy.
Steaming inside, he said slowly, almost coldly, “Maybe dey
is, Massa—” Then, defensively, “I don’t know dat many—”
“Well, okay, you don’t want to tell you’ve been slippin’ off
my place at night, but I know it’s time, and I know where you
go and how often you go. I don’t want that road patrol
maybe shooting you like happened to that Mr. Jewett’s
trainer nigger, so I’ll tell you what I’m going to do, boy. When

we get back, I’m goin’ to write you out a travelin’ pass to go
chase tail every night if you want to! Ain’t never thought I’d
do that for no nigger!”
Massa Lea seemed almost embarrassed, then covered
it with a frown. “But I’m going to tell you one thing. First time
you mess up, don’t get back by daybreak, or too wore out
to work, or I find out you’ve been on that Jewett place again,
or anything else you know you’re not supposed to do, I’m
tearin’ up the pass for good—and you along with it. Got
that?”
Chicken George was incredulous. “Massa, I sho’
’preciate dat! Sho’ do, Massa!”
Expansively, Massa Lea waved away the thanks. “All
right now, you see I’m not half bad as you niggers make
out. You can tell ’em I know how to treat a nigger good if I
want to.”
The leering grin returned, “Okay, what about them hot
black wenches, boy? How many can you mount in a night?”
Chicken George was squirming in his seat. “Suh, like I
said, ain’t know many—”
But his words seemed unheard as Massa Lea went on. “I
hear tell whole lots of white men go and find nigger women
for their pleasure. You know that happens, don’t you, boy?”
“I’se heared of it, Massa,” he said, trying not to think
about the fact that he was talking to his own father. But
apart from what went on in plantation cabins, George knew
that in Burlington, Greensboro, and Durham there were
“special houses,” spoken of only in hushed tones, usually
run by some free black woman, where he had heard that
white men paid from fifty cents to a dollar to couple with
women in their choice of colors from sooty black to high
yaller.
“Hell,” the massa persisted, “I’m just talkin’ to you sittin’
up here by ourselves in this wagon. From what I hear tell,
they’re nigger women, all right, but by God they’re women!
Especially if it’s one of the kind that lets a man know she
wants it as much as he does. I hear tell they can be as hot
as firecrackers, not always claimin’ they’re sick and whinin’
about everythin’ under the sun.” The massa looked

inquisitively at Chicken George. “Fellow I know told me you
nigger boys can’t never get enough of that hot black tail,
that your experience?”
“Massa, nawsuh—leas’ways, I means jes’ now sho’ ain’t
—”
“There you go talkin’ round the maypole again!”
“Don’t mean roun’ no pole, Massa.” Chicken George was
trying his best to project his seriousness. “I’se tryin’ to say
sump’n to you I ain’t never tol’ nobody, Massa! You know
dat Massa MacGregor wid dem spangle yellow birds in de
cockfights?”
“Of course. He and I talk a lot. What’s he got to do with
it?”
“Well, you done give yo’ word you gon’ give me a pass,
so ain’t no need me lyin’. Well, yassuh, lately I been slippin’
out jes’ like you say, visitin’ dis here gal over at Massa
MacGregor’s—” His face was a study in earnestness.
“Dis here’s sump’n I really been needin’ to talk wid
somebody I really can talk to, Massa. Jes’ cain’t figger ’er
out! She name Matilda, she work in dey fiel’, an’ fill in if dey
needs ’er in dey big house. Massa, she de firs’ gal don’t
care what I’se said or tried, won’t let herself be touched,
nawsuh! Bes’ I can git, she say she like me all right, ’cept
she cain’t stan’ my ways—an’ I tol’ ’er I sho’ ain’t got no use
for her’n neither. I tol’ her I can git all de womens I wants,
she jes’ say go git ’em den, leave her alone.”
Massa Lea was listening to Chicken George as
incredulously as he had to the massa.
“An’ ’nother thing,” he went on. “Every time I goes back
she keep quotin’ de Bible on me! How come she read de
Bible, a preacher massa raised ’er till his ’ligion made ’im
sell his niggers. Fact, I tell you how ’ligious she is! She
heared ’bout bunch o’ free niggers givin’ a big night frolic
wid eatin’ an’ liquor an’ dancin’ somewheres in de woods
roun’ over dere. Well, dis gal, ain’t but seb’nteen, slip ’way
from Massa MacGregor’s an’ bust in on dat frolic while it
gwine on hot an’ heavy! Dey says she commence sich a
carryin’ on, shoutin’ for de Lawd to come save dem sinners
’fo’ de devil git dere an’ burn ’em up, dat every one dem

free niggers near ’bout run over one ’nother leavin’ dere,
dey fiddler hard behin’ ’em!”
Massa Lea laughed uproariously. “Sounds like a hell of a
gal! I’ll say that!”
“Massa—” Chicken George hesitated “’Fo’ I met her, I is
been catchin’ jes’ much tail as you says—but dog if she
ain’t got me to feelin’ mo’ to it dan jes’ tail. Man git to
thinkin’ ’bout jumpin’ de broom wid a good woman—”
Chicken George was astounded at himself. “Dat is, if she
have me,” he said in a weak voice. Then even more weakly,
“An’ if ’n you wouldn’t make no objections—”
They rode on quite a way amid the wagon’s squeakings
and the gamecocks’ cluckings before Massa Lea spoke
again. “Does Mr. MacGregor know you’ve been courtin’ this
gal of his?”
“Well, she bein’ a field han’, don’t ’magine she never say
nothin’ to him directly, nawsuh. But de big-house niggers
knows, I speck some dem done tol’ it.”
After another lull, Massa Lea asked, “How many niggers
has Mr. MacGregor got?”
“He got pretty big place, Massa. Seem like from de size
his slave row, I’d reckon twenty or mo’ niggers, Massa.”
George was confused by the questions.
“Been thinking,” said the massa after another silence.
“Since you were born, you never give me any real trouble—
in fact, you’ve helped me around the place a lot, and I’m
goin’ to do somethin’ for you. You just heard me sayin’ a
while back I need some younger field-hand niggers. Well, if
that gal’s big enough fool to jump the broom with somebody
loves runnin’ tail as much as I expect you won’t never quit
doin’, then I’ll ride over and talk with Mr. MacGregor. If he’s
got as many niggers as you say, he ought not to miss one
field gal all that much—if we can come to a decent price.
Then you could move that gal—what’s her name?”
“’Tilda—Matilda, Massa,” breathed Chicken George,
unsure if he was hearing right.
“Then you could move her over to my place, build y’all a
cabin—”
George’s mouth worked, but no sound came out. Finally

he blurted, “Nothin’ but high-class massa do dat!”
Massa Lea grunted. He gestured. “Long as you
understand your first place remains down with Mingo!”
“’Cose, suh!”
Mustering a scowl, Massa Lea directed a stabbing
forefinger at his driver. “After you get hitched, I’m takin’
back that travelin’ pass! Help that what’s her name, Matilda,
keep your black ass home where it belongs!”
Chicken George was beyond words.

CHAPTER 94
When the sun rose on the morning of Chicken George’s
wedding in August of 1827, the groom was frantically
fastening iron hinges onto the cured-oak doorjamb of his
still uncompleted two-room cabin. Loping to the barn when
that was done, he hurried back carrying over his head the
new door that Uncle Pompey had carved and stained with
the juice of crushed black walnut hulls, and mounted it in
place. Then, casting a worried glance at the rising sun, he
stopped long enough to wolf down the sausage and biscuit
sandwich that had been practically thrown at him by his
mammy late the previous evening in her fury at his long
succession of put-offs, excuses, interruptions, and
excursions. He had waited so long, and worked so slowly,
that she had finally commanded everyone else not only to
stop helping him anymore, but also even to stop offering
him any encouragement.
Chicken George next quickly filled a large keg with
slaked lime and water, stirred it vigorously, and—as fast as
he could—dipped his large brush into the mess and began
slathering whitewash over the outside of the rough-sawn
planking. It was about ten o’clock when he finally backed
away, almost as whitened as the cabin, to survey the
completed job. There was plenty of time to spare, he told
himself. All he had to do was bathe and dress, then take the
two-hour wagon ride to the MacGregor plantation, where
the wedding was due to start at one.
Bounding between the cabin and the well, he dashed
three bucketfuls of water into the new galvanized tub in the
cabin’s front room. Humming loudly as he scrubbed
himself, he dried himself off briskly and then wrapped
himself in the bleached-sacking towel to run into the
bedroom. After climbing into his cotton long drawers, he
slipped on his blue stiff-front shirt, red socks, yellow pants,
and yellow belt-backed suitcoat, and finally his brand-new
bright-orange shoes, all of which he had bought with

hackfighting winnings, an item at a time, over the past few
months while he and Massa Lea were traveling to various
North Carolina cities. Squeaking in his stiff shoes over to
the bedroom table and sitting down on Uncle Mingo’s
wedding present, a carved stool with a seat of woven
hickory strips, Chicken George smiled widely at himself in
the long-handled mirror that was going to be one of his
surprise presents for Matilda. With the mirror’s help, he
carefully arranged around his neck the green woolen scarf
Matilda had knitted for him. Lookin’ good, he had to admit.
There remained only the crowning touch. Pulling a round
cardboard box out from under the bed, he removed the top
and with almost reverent gentleness lifted out the black
derby hat that was his wedding present from Massa Lea.
Turning it slowly around and around on stiff forefingers, he
savored its stylish shape almost sensuously before
returning to the mirror and positioning the derby at just the
right rakish tilt over one eye.
“Git out’n dere! We been settin’ a hour in dis wagon!” His
mammy Kizzy’s shout from just outside the window left no
doubt that her rage was undiminished.
“Comin’, Mammy!” he hollered back. After one last
appreciation of his ensemble in the mirror, he slipped a flat,
small bottle of white lightning into his inside coat pocket
and emerged from the new cabin as if expecting applause.
He was going to flash his biggest smile and tip his hat until
he got a look at the baleful glares of his mammy, Miss
Malizy, Sister Sarah, and Uncle Pompey, all sitting frozenly
in their Sunday best in the wagon. Averting his glance, and
whistling as breezily as he could manage, he climbed up
onto the driver’s seat—careful not to disturb a crease—
slapped the reins against the backs of the two mules, and
they were under way—only an hour late.
Along the road, Chicken George sneaked several
fortifying nips from his bottle, and the wagon arrived at the
MacGregor place shortly after two. Kizzy, Sister Sarah, and
Miss Malizy descended amid profuse apologies to the
visibly worried and upset Matilda in her white gown. Uncle
Pompey unloaded the food baskets they had brought, and

after pecking at Matilda’s cheek, Chicken George went
swaggering about slapping backs and breathing liquor in
the faces of the guests as he introduced himself. Apart from
those he already knew who lived in Matilda’s slave row,
they were mostly prayer-meeting folk she had recruited
from among the slaves of two nearby plantations and whom
she had gotten permission to invite. She wanted them to
meet her intended, and so did they. Though most of them
had heard a lot about him from sources other than herself,
their first actual sight of Chicken George evoked reactions
ranging from muttering to open-mouthed astonishment. As
he cut his swath through the wedding party, he gave a wide
berth to Kizzy, Sister Sarah, and Miss Malizy, whose
dagger stares were being sharpened by every remark each
was overhearing about the dubiousness of Matilda’s
“catch.” Uncle Pompey had chosen simply to merge with
the other guests as if he were unaware of who the
bridegroom was.
Finally, the hired white preacher came out of the big
house, followed by the massas and Missis MacGregor and
Lea. They stopped in the backyard, the preacher clutching
his Bible like a shield, and the suddenly quiet crowd of
black people grouped stiffly a respectful distance away. As
Matilda’s missis had planned it, the wedding would
combine some of the white Christian wedding service with
jumping the broom afterward. Guiding her rapidly sobering
groom by one yellow sleeve, Matilda positioned them
before the preacher, who cleared his throat and proceeded
to read a few solemn passages from his Bible. Then he
asked, “Matilda and George, do you solemnly swear to
take each other, for better or worse, the rest of your lives?”
“I does,” said Matilda softly.
“Yassuh!” said Chicken George, much too loudly.
Flinching, the preacher paused and then said, “I
pronounce you man and wife!”
Among the black guests, someone sobbed.
“Now you may kiss the bride!”
Seizing Matilda, Chicken George crushed her in his
arms and gave her a resounding smack. Amid the ensuing

gasps and tongue-clucking, it occurred to him that he might
not be making the best impression, and while they locked
arms and jumped the broom, he racked his brains for
something to say that would lend some dignity to the
occasion, something that would placate his slave-row
family and win over the rest of those Bible toters. He had it!
“De Lawd is my shepherd!” he proclaimed. “He done
give me what I wants!”
When he saw the stares and glares that greeted this
announcement, he decided to give up on them, and the first
chance he got, he slipped the bottle from his pocket and
drained it dry. The rest of the festivities—a wedding feast
and reception—passed in a blur, and it was Uncle Pompey
who drove the Lea plantation’s wagon homeward through
the sunset. Grim and mortified, Mammy Kizzy, Miss Malizy,
and Sister Sarah cast malevolent glances at the spectacle
behind them: the bridegroom snoring soundly with his head
in the lap of his tearful bride, his green scarf askew and
most of his face concealed under his black derby.
Chicken George snorted awake when the wagon jerked
to a stop alongside their new cabin. Sensing groggily that
he should beg everyone’s forgiveness, he began to try, but
the doors of three cabins slammed like gunshots. But he
wouldn’t be denied a last courtly gesture. Picking up his
bride, he pushed open the door with one foot and somehow
maneuvered both of them inside without injury—only to
stumble with her over the tub of bathwater that still stood in
the middle of the room. It was the final humiliation—but all
was forgotten and forgiven when Matilda, with a shriek of
joy, caught sight of her special wedding present: the highly
lacquered, eight-day-winding grandfather clock, as tall as
herself, that Chicken George had purchased with the last of
his hackfight savings and hauled in the back of the wagon
all the way from Greensboro.
As he sat bleary-eyed on the floor where he’d fallen,
bathwater soaking his brand-new orange shoes, Matilda
went over to him and reached out her hand to help him up.
“You come wid me now, George. I’m gwine put you to
bed.”

CHAPTER 95
By daybreak, Chicken George was gone back down the
road to his gamefowl. Then, about an hour after breakfast,
Miss Malizy heard someone calling her name and, going to
the kitchen door, she was startled to see the new bride,
whom she greeted and invited inside.
“No’m, thank you,” said Matilda. “I jes’ wanted to ax
whichaway is de fiel’ dey’s workin’ in today, an’ wherebouts
can I fin’ me a hoe?”
A few minutes later, Matilda simply appeared and joined
Kizzy, Sister Sarah, and Uncle Pompey in the day’s field
work. Late that evening they all gathered about her in slave
row, keeping her company until her husband got home. In
the course of conversation, Matilda asked if any slave-row
prayer meetings were held regularly, and when she was
told that none were, proposed that one be made a part of
each Sunday afternoon.
“Tell you de truth, I’se shame to say I ain’t done nowhere
near de prayin’ I ought to,” said Kizzy.
“Me neither,” confessed Sister Sarah.
“Jes’ ain’t never seem to me no ’mount of prayin’ is did
nothin’ to change white folks,” said Uncle Pompey.
“De Bible say Joseph was sol’ a slave to de Egyptians,
but de Lawd was wid Joseph, an’ de Lawd blessed de
Egyptians’ house for Joseph’s sake,” Matilda said in a
matter-of-fact manner.
Three glances, quickly exchanged, expressed their
steadily mounting respect for the young woman.
“Dat George tol’ us yo’ first massa a preacher,” said
Sister Sarah. “You soun’ like a preacher yo’se’f!”
“I’se a servant o’ de Lawd, dat’s all,” replied Matilda.
Her prayer meetings began the following Sunday, two
days after Chicken George and Massa Lea had gone off in
the wagon with twelve gamecocks.
“Massa say he finally got de right birds to go fight where
de big money is,” he explained, saying that this time the

Lea birds would be competing in an important “main”
somewhere near Goldsboro.
One morning when they were out in the field, carefully
employing a gentle tone that suggested the sympathy of a
forty-seven-year-old woman for a new bride of eighteen,
Sister Sarah said, “Lawdy, honey, I ’spect yo’ married life
gwine be split up twixt you an’ dem chickens.”
Matilda looked at her squarely. “What I done always
heared, an’ b’lieved, is anybody’s marriage jes’ what dey
makes it. An’ I reckon he know what kin’ he want our’n to
be.”
But having established her stand about marriage,
Matilda would readily share in any conversation about, her
colorful husband, whether it was humorous or serious in
nature.
“He done had itchy foots since he was a crawlin’ baby,”
Kizzy told her one night, visiting in the new cabin.
“Yes, ma’am,” said Matilda, “I figgered dat when he
come a-courtin’. He wouldn’t talk ’bout hardly nothin’ ’cept
rooster fightin’ an’ him an’ de massa travelin’
somewheres.” Hesitating, she then added in her frank way,
“But when he foun’ out weren’t no man gwine have his way
wid me ’fo’ we’d jumped a broom, Lawd, he had a fit! Fact,
one time I give up on seein’ ’im again. Don’t know what hit
’im, but I like to fell out de night he come a-rushin’ in an’
say, ‘Look, let’s us git hitched!”
“Well, I’se sho’ glad he had de sense!” said Kizzy. “But
now you’s hitched, gal, I’se gwine tell you straight what’s on
my min’. I wants me some gran’chilluns!”
“Ain’t nothin’ wrong wid dat, Miss Kizzy. ’Cause I wants
me some young’uns, too, same as other womens haves.”
When Matilda announced two months later that she was
in a family way, Kizzy was beside herself. Thinking about
her son becoming a father made her think about her father
—more than she had in many years—and one evening
when Chicken George was away again, Kizzy asked, “Is he
ever mentioned anything to you’bout his gran’pappy?”
“No’m, he ain’t.” Matilda looked puzzled.
“He ain’t?” Seeing the older woman’s disappointment,

Matilda added quickly, “Reckon he jes’ ain’t got to it yet,
Mammy Kizzy.”
Deciding that she’d better do it herself, since she
remembered more than he did anyway, Kizzy began telling
Matilda of her life at Massa Waller’s for sixteen years until
her sale to Massa Lea, and most of what she had to say
was about her African pappy and the many things he had
told to her. “Tilda, how come I’se tellin’ you all dis, I jes’
wants you to understan’ how I wants dat chile in yo’ belly an’
any mo’ you has to know all ’bout ’im, too, on ’count of he’s
dey great-gran’daddy.”
“I sho’ does understan’, Mammy Kizzy,” said Matilda,
whereupon her mother-in-law told yet more of her
memories, with both of them feeling their closeness
growing throughout the rest of the evening.
Chicken George’s and Matilda’s baby boy was born
during the spring of 1828, with Sister Sarah serving as the
midwife, assisted by a nervous Kizzy. Her joy about having
a grandchild at last tempered her anger that the boy’s
father was yet again off somewhere for a week with Massa
Lea. The following evening, when the new mother felt up to
it, everyone on slave row gathered at the cabin to celebrate
the birth of the second baby that had been born there on the
Lea plantation.
“You’s finally ‘Gran’mammy Kizzy’ now!” said Matilda,
propped up in bed against some pillows, nestling the baby
and weakly smiling at her visitors.
“Lawd, yes! Don’t it soun’ pretty!” exclaimed Kizzy, her
whole face one big grin.
“Soun’ like to me Kizzy gittin’ ol ’, dat’s what!” said Uncle
Pompey with a twinkle in his eye.
“Hmph! Ain’t no woman here ol’ as some we knows!”
snorted Sister Sarah.
Finally, Miss Malizy commanded, “Awright, time us all git
out’n here an’ let ’em res’!” And they all did, except for
Kizzy.
After being quietly thoughtful for a while, Matilda said,
“Ma’am, I been thinkin’ ’bout what you tol’ me ’bout yo’
pappy. Since I never even got to see mine, I b’lieves

George wouldn’t care if dis child have my pappy’s name. It
was Virgil, my mammy say.”
The name instantly had Chicken George’s hearty
approval when he returned, filled with such jubilance at the
birth of a son that he could hardly contain himself. Black
derby awry as his big hands swooped the infant up in the
air, he exclaimed, “Mammy,’member what I tol’ you, I gwine
tell my young’uns what you tol’ me?” His face alight, he
made a little ceremony of seating himself before the
fireplace with Virgil held upright in his lap as he spoke to
him in grand tones. “Listen here, boy! Gwine tell you ’bout
yo’ great-gran’daddy. He were a African dat say he name
‘Kunta Kinte.’ He call a guitar a ko, an’ a river ‘Kamby
Bolongo,’ an’ lot mo’ things wid African names. He say he
was choppin’ a tree to make his l’il brother a drum when it
was fo’ mens come up an’ grabbed ’im from behin’. Den a
big ship brung ’im crost de big water to a place call ’Naplis.
An’ he had runned off fo’ times when he try to kill dem dat
cotched ’im an’ dey cut half his foot off!”
Lifting the infant, he turned his face toward Kizzy. “An’ he
jumped de broom wid de big-house cook name Miss Bell,
an’ dey had a l’il ol’ gal—an’ dere she is, yo’ gran’mammy
grinnin’ at you right dere!” Matilda was beaming her
approval as widely as Kizzy, whose eyes were moist with
love and pride.
With her husband away as much as he was, Matilda
began spending more of her time in the evenings with
Gran’mammy Kizzy, and after a while they were pooling
their rations and eating their supper together. Always
Matilda would say the grace as Kizzy sat quietly with her
hands folded and her head bowed. Afterward Matilda
would nurse the baby, and then Kizzy would sit proudly with
little Virgil clasped against her body, rocking him back and
forth, either humming or singing to him softly as the
grandfather clock ticked and Matilda sat reading her worn
Bible. Even though it wasn’t against the massa’s rules,
Kizzy still disapproved of reading—but it was the Bible, so
she guessed no harm could come of it. Usually, not too long
after the baby was asleep, Kizzy’s head would begin

bobbing, and often she would begin murmuring to herself
as she dozed. When she leaned over to retrieve the
sleeping Virgil from Kizzy’s arms, Matilda sometimes
heard snatches of the things she was mumbling. They were
always the same: “Mammy ... Pappy ... Don’t let ’em take
me! ... My people’s los’.... Ain’t never see ’em no mo’ dis
worl’.... ” Deeply touched, Matilda would whisper something
like, “We’s yo’ people now, Gran’mammy Kizzy,” and after
putting Virgil to bed, she would gently rouse the older
woman—whom she was growing to love as she had her
own mother—and after accompanying her to her own
cabin, Matilda would often be wiping at her eyes on her way
back.
On Sunday afternoons, only the three women attended
Matilda’s prayer services at first—until Sister Sarah’s sharp
tongue finally shamed Uncle Pompey into joining them. No
one ever even thought about inviting Chicken George, for
even when he was at home, by Sunday noon he would have
returned to the gamefowl area. With the little group of five
seated solemnly on chairs brought from their cabins and
placed in a half circle under the chinquapin tree, Matilda
would read some biblical passages she had selected.
Then, with her serious brown eyes searching each face,
she would ask if any among them would care to lead in
prayer, and seeing that none of them did, she would always
say, “Well, den, will y’all jine me on bended knee?” As they
all kneeled facing her, she would offer a moving,
unpretentious prayer. And afterward she’d lead them in
singing some spirited song; even Uncle Pompey’s
cracked, raspy baritone joined in as they made slave row
resound with such rousing spirituals as “Joshua fit de battle
o’ Jericho! Jericho! Jericho! ... An’ de walls come atumblin’ down!” The meeting turned then into a group
discussion on the general subject of faith.
“Dis is de Lawd’s day. We all got a soul to save an’ a
heab’n’ to maintain,” Matilda might offer in her matter-offact way. “We needs to keep in our minds who it was made
us, an’ dat was Gawd. Den who it was redeemed us, an’
dat was Christ Jesus. Christ Jesus teached us to be

humble, an’ mindful, dat we can be reborn in de sperrit.”
“I loves Lawd Jesus good as anybody,” Kizzy testified
humbly, “but y’all see, I jes’ ain’t never knowed dat much
’bout ’im ’til I was up some size, even though my mammy
say she had me christened when I was jes’ a l’il thing, at
one dem big camp meetin’s.”
“Seem like to me we does be bes’ if we’s been put next
to Gawd when we’s young’uns,” said Sister Sarah. She
gestured at Virgil in his gran’mammy’s lap. “’Cause dat
way we starts out early soakin’ up some ’ligion an’ settin’
sto’ by it.”
Miss Malizy spoke to Uncle Pompey. “You don’t know, if
you’d of started out early, you might of made a preacher.
You even got de look of one as it is.”
“Preacher! How I’m gwine preach an’ cain’t even read!”
he exclaimed.
“De Lawd put things to say in yo’ mouth if He call you to
preach,” Matilda said.
“Dat husban’ of your’n call hisself preachin’ roun’ here
once!” said Miss Malizy. “He ever tol’ you ’bout dat?” They
all laughed and Kizzy said, “He sho’ could of made some
kin’ o’ preacher! Much as he love to show off an’ run his
mouth!”
“He’d o’ been one dem trickin’ an’ trancin’ preachers
holdin’ big revivals!” said Sister Sarah.
They talked for a while about powerful preachers they
had all either seen or heard about. Then Uncle Pompey told
of his powerfully religious mother, whom he remembered
from boyhood on the plantation where he was born. “She
was big an’ fat an’ I reckon de shoutin’est woman anybody
ever heared of.”
“Remind me of ol’ maid Sister Bessie on de plantation I
was raised on,” said Miss Malizy. “She was ’nother one
dem shoutin’ womens. She’d got ol’ widout no husban’ till it
come one dem big camp meetins’. Well, she shouted till
she went in a trance. She come out’n it sayin’ she jes’ had
a talk wid de Lawd. She say He say her mission on de
earth was to save ol’ Br’er Timmons from goin’ to hell by
him jumpin’ de broom wid sich a Christian woman as her!

Scared ’im so bad he jumped it, too!”
Though few of those he ran into on his trips would have
guessed from the way he acted that Chicken George had
jumped the broom—or ever would—he surprised the
women on slave row at home with how warmly he took to
marriage and how well he treated his wife and family. Never
did he return from a cockfight—wearing his scarf and
derby, which had become his costume, rain or shine,
summer or winter—without winnings to put away. Most of
the time, giving Matilda a few dollars, he didn’t have much
money left after paying for the gifts he, of course, always
brought along not only for Matilda and his mammy, but also
for Miss Malizy, Sister Sarah, and Uncle Pompey as well as
for young Virgil. He always came home, too, with at least an
hour’s worth of news about whatever he had seen or heard
about on his travels. As his slave-row family gathered
around him, Kizzy would nearly always think how her African
pappy had brought another slave row most of its news, and
now it was her son.
Returning once from a long journey that had taken him to
Charleston, Chicken George described “so many dem
great big sailin’ ships dey poles look like a thicket! An’
niggers like ants packin’ an’ polin’ out dem great big
tobacco hogsheads an’ all kinds o’ other stuff to sail de
water to dat England an’ different mo’ places. Look like
wherever me an’ massa travels, nowdays, it’s niggers
diggin’ canals, an’ layin’ dem gravel highways, an’ buildin’
railroads! Niggers jes’ buildin’ dis country wid dey
muscles!”
Another time he had heard that “de white folks threatenin’
de Indians ’bout takin’ in so many niggers on dey
reservations. Plenty dem Creeks and Seminoles done
married niggers. It’s even some nigger Indian chiefs! But I
hears dem Chocktaws, Chickasaws, an’ Cherokees hates
niggers even worse’n white folks does.”
He would be asked far fewer questions than they really
wanted to know the answers to, and soon, making polite
excuses, Kizzy, Miss Malizy, Sister Sarah, and Uncle
Pompey would disappear into their cabins to let him and

Matilda be alone.
“Done tol’ myself you never gwine hear me wid no whole
lot of complainin’, George,” she told him one such night as
they lay in bed, “but I sho’ do feel like I ain’t hardly got no
husban’ a lot o’ times.”
“Knows what you means, honey, I sho’ does,” he said
easily. “Out dere travelin’ wid massa, or sometime me and
Uncle Mingo up all night wid some dem sick chickens, I
be’s jes’ thinkin’ ’bout you an’ de young’un.”
Matilda bit her tongue, choosing not to voice her doubts,
even her suspicions about some of the things he said.
Instead she asked, “You figger it’s ever gwine git any
better, George?”
“Ever git massa rich enough! So he be willin’ to stay
home hisself. But look, it ain’t hurtin’ us none, baby! Look
how we’s savin’ if I can keep bringin’ in winnin’s like I is.”
“Money ain’t you!” said Matilda flatly, and then she made
her tone softer. “An’ we’d save a lot mo’ if you jes’ ease up
buyin’ presents for ever’body! We all ’preciates ’em, you
knows dat! But George, where I ever gwine wear sich as
dat fine silk dress I specks better’n any missy got!”
“Baby you can jes’ put dat dress on right in here, den pull
it off fo’ me!”
“You’s terrible!”
He was the most exciting man—beyond anyone she had
even dreamed of knowing, at least in that way. And he
certainly was a fine provider. But she didn’t really trust him,
and she couldn’t help wondering whether he loved her and
their baby as much as he did traveling with the massa. Was
there anything in the Scriptures about chickens? Vaguely
she recalled something—in Matthew, if she wasn’t
mistaken—about “a hen gathereth her chickens beneath
her wings ...” I must look that up, she told herself.
When she did have a husband at home, though, Matilda
submerged her doubts and disappointments and tried to
be the best wife she knew how. If she knew he was coming,
a big meal was waiting; if he came unexpectedly, she
prepared one right away, day or night. After a while she quit
trying to get him to bless a meal, simply saying a short

grace herself, then delighting in watching him eat while he
held the gurgling Virgil in his lap. Then afterward, with the
boy put to bed, examining George’s face, she pinched out
blackheads; or heating water to half fill the tin tub, she
would wash his hair and his back; and if he arrived
complaining of aching feet, she would rub them with a warm
paste of roasted onions and homemade soap. Finally,
whenever the candles were blown out and they were again
between her fresh sheets, Chicken George would make up
for his absences to the utmost. About the time Virgil began
to walk, Matilda was great with child again; she was
surprised it hadn’t happened sooner.
With another child on the way, Gran’mammy Kizzy
decided the time had come to take her son aside and tell
him a thing or two that had been on her mind for a long
time. He arrived home from a trip one Sunday morning to
find her minding Virgil while Matilda was up in the big
house helping Miss Malizy prepare dinner for guests who
were soon to arrive.
“You set down right dere!” she said, wasting no time. He
did, eyebrows risen. “I don’t care if you’s grown now, I still
brought you in dis worl’, an’ you gwine listen! God done
give you a real good woman you ain’t noways treatin’ right! I
ain’t foolin’ wid you now! You hear me? I still take a stick to
your behin’ in a minute! You got to spen’ mo’ time wid yo’
wife an’ young’un, an’ her awready big wid yo’ nex’ one,
too!”
“Mammy, what you ’speck?” he said as irritably as he
dared. “When massa say, ‘Go,’ tell him I ain’t?”
Kizzy’s eyes were blazing. “Ain’t talkin’ ’bout dat an’ you
know it! Tellin’ dat po’ gal you settin’ up nights tendin’ sick
chickens an’ sich as dat! Where you git all dis lyin’ an’
drinkin’ an’ gamblin’ an’ runnin’ roun’ ? You knows I ain’t
raised you like dat! An’ don’t think dis jes’ me talkin’! ’Tilda
ain’t no fool, she jes’ ain’t let you know she seein’ right
through you, too!” Without another word, Gran’mammy
Kizzy stalked angrily from the cabin.
With Massa Lea being among the entrants for the great
1830 cockfighting tournament in Charleston, no one could

criticize Chicken George for being away when the baby
was born. He returned as ecstatic to learn about his second
son—whom Matilda had already named Ashford, after her
brother—as he was aglow with his good luck. “Massa
winned over a thousan’ dollars, an’ I winned fifty in de
hackfights! Y’all ought to hear how white folks an’ niggers
both has started to hollerin’, ‘I’m bettin’ on dat Chicken
George’!” He told her how in Charleston, Massa Lea had
learned that President Andrew Jackson was a man after
their own style. “Ain’t nobody love cockfightin’ mo’n he do!
He call in dem big congressmens an’ senators an’ he show
’em a time fightin’ dem Tennessee birds o’ his’n right dere
in dat White House! Massa say dat Jackson gamble an’
drink wid any man. Dey say when dem matchin’ chestnut
hosses pullin’ ’im in dat fine Pres’dent’s coach, he be
settin’ up dere wid his velvet-lined suitcase o’ liquor right
beside ’im! Massa say far as southern white men’s
concerned, he can stay Pres’dent till he git tired!” Matilda
was unimpressed.
But Chicken George had seen something in Charleston
that shook her—and the others on slave row—as deeply as
it had him. “I bet you I seen a mile long o’ niggers bein’ driv
along in chains!”
“Lawdy! Niggers from where?” asked Miss Malizy.
“Some sol’ out’n Nawth an’ South Ca’liny, but mainly
out’n Virginia was what I heared!” he said. “Different
Charleston niggers tol’ me it’s thousan’s o’ niggers a month
gittin’ took to great big cotton plantations steady bein’
cleared out’n de woods in Alabama, Mississippi,
Louisiana, Arkansas, an’Texas. Dey say de ol’style nigger
traders on a hoss is gone, done become big companies
wid offices in big hotels! Dey say it’s even big paddlewheel ships carryin’ nothin’ but chained-up Virginia niggers
down to New Orleans! An’ dey says—”
“Jes’ heish!” Kizzy sprang upright. “HEISH!” She went
bolting toward her cabin in tears.
“What come over her?” George asked Matilda after the
others had left in embarrassment.
“Ain’t you know?” she snapped. “Her mammy an’ pappy

in Virginia las’ she know, an’ you scare her half to death!”
Chicken George looked sick. His face told her he hadn’t
realized, but Matilda refused to let him off that easily. She
had become convinced that for all of his worldliness, he
was sorely lacking in sensitivity about too many things. “You
knows well as I does Mammy Kizzy been sol’ herself! Jes’
like I was!” she told him. “Anybody ever sol’ ain’t gwine
never forgit it! An’ won’t never be de same no mo’!” She
looked at him significantly. “You ain’t never been. Dat’s how
come you don’t understan’ no massa cain’t never be
trusted—includin’ your’n!”
“What you rilin’ at me fo’?” he demanded testily.
“You ax me what upset Mammy Kizzy an’ I tol’ you. Ain’t
got no mo’ to say ’bout it!” Matilda caught herself. She
didn’t want harshness between her and her husband. After
a moment’s silence, she managed a small smile. “George, I
knows what make Mammy Kizzy feel better! Go make ’er
come on over here to hear you tell dis baby ’bout his
African gran’pappy like you tol’ Virgil.” And that’s just what
he did.

CHAPTER 96
It was near dawn, and Chicken George was standing in the
doorway swaying slightly and grinning at Matilda, who was
sitting up waiting for him. His black derby was askew. “Fox
got’mongst de chickens,” he slurred. “Me an’ Uncle Mingo
been all night catchin’ ’em—”
Matilda’s upraised hand silenced him, and her tone was
cold. “Reckon de fox give you liquor an’ sprinkled you wid
dat rosewater I smells—” Chicken George’s mouth opened.
“Naw, George, you listen! Look here, long as I’se yo’ wife,
an’ mammy to our chilluns, I be here when you leaves an’ I
be here when you ’gits back, ’cause ain’t us much as
yo’self you’s doin’ wrong. It right in de Bible: ‘You sows
what you reaps’—sow single, you reaps double! An’
Matthew sebenth chapter say, ‘Wid whatsoever measure
you metes out to others, dat shall be measured out to you
again!’”
He tried to pretend that he was too outraged to speak,
but he just couldn’t think of anything to say. Turning, he
reeled back out the door and staggered down the road to
sleep with the chickens.
But he was back the next day, derby hat in hand, and
dutifully spent all but a few nights with his family through the
rest of that fall and winter, and those few only when he and
the massa were away briefly on some trip. And when
Matilda’s next labor pains quickened early one morning in
January of 1831, although it was the height of gamecocking
season, he persuaded the massa to let him stay home—
and to take the ailing Uncle Mingo along with him to that
day’s fights.
Anxiously, he paced outside the cabin door, wincing and
frowning as he listened to Matilda’s anguished moans and
cries. Then, hearing other voices, he tiptoed gingerly close
and heard his Mammy Kizzy urging, “Keep pullin’ ’gainst my
hand—hard, honey! ... Another breath ... deep! ... dat’s
right! ... Hold! ... Hold!” Then Sister Sarah commanded,

“Bear down, you hear mel ... Now PUSH! ... PUSH!”
Then, soon: “Here it come ... Yes, Lawd—”
When he heard sharp slaps, then an infant’s shrill cries,
Chicken George backed away several steps, dazed by
what he had just heard. It wasn’t long before Gran’mammy
Kizzy emerged, her face creasing into a grin. “Well, look
like all y’all got in you is boys!”
He began leaping and springing about, whooping so
boisterously that Miss Malizy came bolting out the back
door of the big house. He ran to meet her, scooped her up
off her feet, whirled her around and around, and shouted,
“Dis one be name after me!”
The next evening, for the third time, he gathered
everyone around to listen as he told his family’s newest
member about the African great-gran’daddy who called
himself Kunta Kinte.
At the end of a routine Caswell County landholders’
meeting late that August, the county courthouse was
resounding with the parting calls of the local planters as
they began to disperse and head homeward. Massa Lea
was driving his wagon—Chicken George squatting in the
back with his pocket clasp knife, gutting and scaling the
string of hand-sized perch that the massa had just bought
from a vendor—when the wagon stopped abruptly.
George’s eyes widened as he sat up in time to see Massa
Lea already on the ground hurrying along with many other
massas toward a white man who had just dismounted from
a heaving, lathered horse. He was shouting wildly to his
swiftly enlarging crowd. Snatches of his words reached
Chicken George and the other blacks, who listened gaping:
“Don’t know how many whole families dead” ... “women,
babies” ... “sleepin’ in their beds when the murderin’
niggers broke in” ... “axes, swords, clubs” ... “nigger
preacher named Nat Turner... ”
The faces of the other blacks mirrored his own dread
foreboding as the white men cursed and gestured with
flushed, furious faces. His mind flashed back to those
terror-filled months after that revolt in Charleston had been
foiled with no one hurt. What on earth would happen now?

Slit-eyed, the massa returned to the wagon, his face frozen
with rage. Never looking back, he drove homeward at a
mad gallop with Chicken George hanging on in the
wagonbed with both hands.
Reaching the big house, Massa Lea sprang from the
wagon, leaving George staring at the cleaned fish.
Moments later, Miss Malizy ran out the kitchen door and
rushed across the backyard toward slave row, flailing her
hands over her bandannaed head. Then the massa
reappeared carrying his shotgun, his voice rasping at
George, “Get to your cabin!”
Ordering everyone on slave row out of their quarters,
Massa Lea told them icily what Chicken George had
already heard. Knowing that he alone might possibly
temper the massa’s wrath, George found his voice.
“Please, Massa—” he said, quavering. The shotgun jerked
directly toward him.
“Git! Everything out of your cabins! All you niggers, GIT!”
For the next hour, carrying, dragging, heaping their meager
belongings outside, under the massa’s searching eyes and
abusive threats of what he would do to whomever he found
concealing any weapons or suspicious objects, they shook
out every cloth, opened every container, cut and tore apart
every cornshuck mattress—and still his fury seemed
beyond any bounds.
With his boot he shattered Sister Sarah’s box of nature
remedies, sending her dried roots and herbs flying while he
yelled at her, “Get rid of that damn voodoo!” Before other
cabins he flung away treasured possessions and smashed
others with his fists or his feet. The four women were
weeping, old Uncle Pompey seemed paralyzed, the
frightened children clutched tearfully about Matilda’s skirts.
Chicken George’s own fury boiled as Matilda cried out,
almost in pain, when the shotgun’s butt smashed the front
paneling of her precious grandfather clock. “Let me find a
sharpened nail in there, some nigger’ll die!”
Leaving slave row in a shambles, the massa rode in the
wagonbed holding his shotgun as George drove them
down to the gamefowl training area.

Faced with the gun and the barked command for all of
their belongings to be emptied out, the terrified old Uncle
Mingo began blurting, “Ain’t done nothin’, Massa—”
“Trustin’ niggers got whole families dead now!” yelled
Massa Lea. Confiscating the ax, the hatchet, the thin
wedge, a metal frame, and both of their pocket knives, the
massa loaded them all into the wagon as Chicken George
and Uncle Mingo stood watching. “In case you niggers try to
break in, I’m sleepin’ with this shotgun!” he shouted at them,
lashing the horse into a gallop and disappearing up the
road in a cloud of dust.

CHAPTER 97
“Hear you’ve got four boysin a rownow!”The massa was
getting off his horse in the gamefowl training area. It had
taken a full year for the white South’s mingled fear and fury
—including Massa Lea’s—to fully subside. Though he had
resumed taking Chicken George with him to cockfights a
month or two after the revolt, the massa’s obvious coldness
had taken the rest of a year to thaw. But for reasons
unknown to either man, their relationship had seemed to
grow closer than ever before ever since then. Neither one
ever mentioned it, but they both hoped fervently that there
would be no more black uprisings.
“Yassuh! Big ol’ fat boy borned fo’ daybreak, Massa!”
said Chicken George, who was mixing a dozen gamehen
egg whites and a pint of beer with oatmeal, cracked wheat,
and a variety of crushed herbs to bake a fresh supply of the
gamecocks’ special bread. He had learned the “secret”
recipe only that morning, grudgingly, from ailing old Uncle
Mingo, whom Massa Lea had ordered to rest in his cabin
until his unpredictable and increasingly severe coughing
spells eased off. In the meanwhile, Chicken George alone
was intensely training twenty-odd top-prime gamecocks
after almost ruthless cullings from among the seventy-six
freshly matured birds recently brought in off the rangewalks.
It was but nine weeks from the day that he and Massa
Lea were to leave for New Orleans. His years of local
victories, plus no few in statewide competitions, had finally
emboldened the massa to pit his topmost dozen birds in
that city’s renowned New Year’s Day season-opening
“main.” If the Lea birds could win as many as half of their
pittings against the caliber of championship fighting cocks
assembled there, the massa would not only win a fortune
but also find himself elevated overnight into recognition
among the entire South’s major gamecockers. Just the
possibility was so exciting that Chicken George had been
able to think of almost nothing else.

Massa Lea had walked his horse over and tied a small
rope from its halter onto the split-rail fence. Ambling back
over near George, the massa scuffed the toe of his boot
against a clump of grass and said, “Mighty funny, four boy
young’uns, an’ you ain’t never named none after me.”
Chicken George was surprised, delighted—and
embarrassed. “You sho’ right, Massa!” he exclaimed
lamely. “Dat ’zactly what to name dat boy— Tom! Yassuh,

Tom!”
The massa looked gratified. Then he glanced toward the
small cabin beneath a tree, his expression serious. “How’s
the old man?”
“Tell you de truth, Massa, middle of las’ night, he had a
bad coughin’ spell. Dat was ’fo’ dey sent Uncle Pompey
down here to git me up dere when ’Tilda havin’ de baby.
But when I cooked ’im sump’n to eat dis mo’nin’, he set up
an’ et it all, an’ swear he feel fine. He got mad when I tol’ ’im
he got to stay in de bed till you say he can come out.”
“Well, let the old buzzard stay in there another day,
anyhow,” said the massa. “Maybe I ought to get a doctor to
come down here and look him over. That bad coughing off
and on, for long as it’s been, it’s no good!”
“Nawsuh. But he sho’ don’ b’lieve in no doctors, Massa
—”
“I don’t care what he believes! But we’ll see how he does
the rest of the week—”
For the next hour, Massa Lea inspected the cockerels
and the stags in their fence-row pens, and finally the
magnificent birds that Chicken George was conditioning
and training. Massa Lea was pleased with what he saw.
Then, for a while, he talked about the forthcoming trip. It
would take almost six weeks to reach New Orleans, he
said, in the heavy new wagon he was having custom-built in
Greensboro. It would have an extended bed with twelve
fitted removable cock coops, a special padded workbench
for daily exercising of birds during travel, along with special
shelves, racks, and bins that Massa Lea had specified to
hold all necessary items and supplies for any long trips
carrying gamecocks. It would be ready in ten days.

When Massa Lea left, Chicken George immersed
himself in the day’s remaining tasks. He was driving the
gamecocks to the limit. The massa had given him the
authority to use his own judgment in further culling out any
birds in which he discovered the slightest flaw of any sort,
as only the most comprehensively superb birds could stand
a chance in the level of competition awaiting them in New
Orleans. Working with the birds, he kept thinking about the
music he had been told he was going to hear in New
Orleans, including big brass bands marching in the streets.
The black sailor he had met in Charleston had also said
that early every Sunday afternoon, thousands of people
would gather in a large public square called “Place Congo”
to watch hundreds of slaves perform the dances of the
African places and peoples they had come from. And the
sailor had sworn that the New Orleans waterfront
surpassed any other he had ever seen. And the women! An
unending supply of them said the sailor, as exotic as they
were willing, of every kind and color, known as “creoles,”
“octoroons,” and “quadroons.” He could hardly wait to get
there.
Late that afternoon, after having meant to do so several
times before when some chore had detained him, George
finally knocked, then stepped on inside the cluttered, musty
cabin of Uncle Mingo.
“How you feelin’?” George asked. “Is it anything I can git
you?” But he didn’t need to wait for an answer.
The old man was shockingly wan and weak—but as
irritable as ever about his enforced inactivity.
“Git on out’n here! Go ax massa how I feels! He know
better’n I does!” Since Uncle Mingo clearly wished to be left
alone, Chicken George did leave, thinking that Mingo was
getting to be like his leathery, pin-feathered old catchcocks
—tough old veterans of many battles, but with age catching
up and taking its toll, leaving mostly the instincts.
By the time the last of the birds had been given their
extra wing-strengthening exercise and returned to their
coops, it was shortly after sundown, and Chicken George at
last felt free to pay at least a brief visit home. Upon

reaching his cabin, delighted to find Kizzy visiting with
Matilda, he told them with much chuck-ling about the
morning’s exchange with the massa about naming the new
baby Tom. When he was through, he noticed with great
surprise that they seemed not to be sharing his enjoyment.
It was Matilda who spoke first, her words flat and
noncommittal, “Well, I reckon lotsa Toms in dis worl’.”
His mammy looked as if she had just had to chew a bar
of soap. “I ’speck me an’ ’Tilda feelin’ de same thing, an’
she ruther spare yo’ feelings ’bout yo’ precious massa.
Ain’t nothin’ wrong wid de name Tom. Jes’ sho’ wish it was
some other Tom dis po’ chile git named after—” She
hesitated, then added quickly, “’Cose, dat’s jes’ my’pinion
—ain’t my young’un, or my business!”
“Well, it’s de Lawd’s business!” snapped Matilda,
stepping across to get her Bible. “Fo’ de chile was born, I
was huntin’ in de Scriptures to see what it say ’bout
names.” Hurriedly she thumbed pages, finding the section,
page, and verse she sought, and read it aloud: “De mem’ry
of de jes’ is blessed; but de name of de wicked shall rot!”
“Have mercy!” exclaimed Gran’mammy Kizzy.
Chicken George rose, incensed. “Awright den! Which
one y’all gwine tell massa we ain’t?” He stood glaring at
them. He was getting sick of so many goadings when he
came in his own house! And he was fed up past the limit
with Matilda’s never-ending damnation from the Bible. He
raked his mind for something he once heard, then it came.
“Y’all call ’im for Tom de Baptis’, den!” He shouted it so
loudly that the faces of his three sons appeared in the
bedroom doorway, and the day-old infant began crying as
Chicken George stomped out.
At that very moment, at the living room writing desk in the
big house, Massa Lea dipped his pen, then scrawled
carefully inside his Bible’s front cover a fifth date-and-birth
line below the four names already recorded there—
Chicken George and his first three sons: “September 20,
1833 ... boy born to Matilda ... name Tom Lea.”
Returning angrily down the road, George fumed that it
wasn’t that he didn’t care for Matilda. She was the finest,

most loyal woman he ever had met. A fine wife, however,
was not necessarily one who piously chastized her husband
every time he turned around just for being human. A man
had a right now and then to enjoy the company of the kind
of women who wanted only to enjoy laughter, liquor, wit, and
the body’s urgencies. And from their past year’s travels
together, he knew that Massa Lea felt the same. After
fighting their gamecocks near any sizable town, they always
stayed on an extra day, with the mules in a stable and some
local gamecocker’s helper paid well to care for the cooped
birds, while he and Massa Lea went their separate ways.
Meeting at the stable early the next morning, they would
collect their gamecocks and ride on homeward, each
nursing hangovers, and neither one saying a word about
the fact that he knew the other one had been tomcattin’.
It was five days before Chicken George’s exasperation
had diminished enough for him to think about returning
home. Ready to forgive them, he strode up the road to
slave row and opened the cabin door.
“Lawd! Is dat you, George?” said Matilda. “De chilluns be
so glad to see dey pappy again! ’Specially dis one—his
eyes wasn’t open yet when you was here las’!”
Instantly furious, he was about to stalk right back outside
when his glance fell upon his older three sons—aged five,
three, and two—huddled awkwardly together, staring at him
almost fearfully. He felt an urge to grab them and hug them
close. Soon he wouldn’t be seeing them for three months
when he went to New Orleans; he must bring them some
really nice presents.
Reluctantly, he sat down at the table when Matilda laid
out a meal for him and sat down to bless the food. Then,
standing back up, she said, “Virgil, go ax Gran’mammy to
come over here.”
Chicken George stopped chewing, merely swallowing
what he had in his mouth. What did the two of them have
plannned to plague him with this time?
Kizzy knocked and came in hugging Matilda, kissing,
petting, and clucking over the three boys before glancing at
her son. “How do? Ain’t seen you so long!”

“How you do, Mammy?” Though he was fuming, he tried
to make a weak joke of it.
Settling in a chair and accepting the baby from Matilda,
his mammy spoke almost conversationally. “George, yo’
chilluns been wantin’ to ax you sump’n—” She turned. “Ain’t
you, Virgil?”
Chicken George saw the oldest boy hanging back. What
had they primed him to say?
“Pappy,” he said finally in his piping voice, “you gwine tell
us’bout our great-gran’daddy?”
Matilda’s eyes reached out to him.
“You’s a good man, George,” said Kizzy softly. “Don’t
never let nobody tell you no different! An’ don’t never git to
feelin’ we don’t love you. I b’lieves maybe you gits mixed up
’bout who you is, an’ sometime who we is. We’s yo’ blood,
jes’ like dese chilluns’ great-gran’pappy.”
“It’s right in de Scriptures—” said Matilda. Seeing
George’s apprehensive glance, she added, “Everything in
de Bible ain’t sump’n hard. De Scriptures have plenty ’bout
love.”
Overwhelmed with emotion, Chicken George moved his
chair near the hearth. The three boys squatted down before
him, their eyes glistened with anticipation, and Kizzy
handed him the baby. Composing himself, he cleared his
throat and began to tell his four sons their gran’mammy’s
story of their great-gran’pappy.
“Pappy, I knows de story, too!” Virgil broke in. Making a
face at his younger brothers, he went ahead and told it
himself—including even the African words.
“He done heared it three times from you, and
gran’mammy don’t cross de do’sill widout tellin’ it again!”
said Matilda with a laugh. George thought: How long had it
been since he last heard his wife laughing?
Trying to recapture the center of attention, Virgil jumped
up and down. “Gran’mammy say de African make us know
who we is!”
“He do dat!” said Gran’mammy Kizzy, beaming.
For the first time in a long time, Chicken George felt that
his cabin was his home again.

CHAPTER 98
Four weeks late, the new wagon was ready to be picked up
in Greensboro. How right the massa had been to have it
built, Chicken George reflected as they drove there, for they
must arrive in New Orleans not creaking and squeaking in
this battered old heap, but in the finest wagon money could
buy—looking the parts of a great gamecocker and his
trainer. For the same reason, before they left Greensboro,
he must borrow a dollar and a half from the massa to buy a
new black derby, to go with the new green scarf that
Matilda had almost finished knitting. He would also make
sure that Matilda packed both his green and yellow suits,
his wide-webbed best red suspenders, and plenty of shirts,
drawers, socks, and handkerchiefs, for after the
cockfighting, he knew he’d have to look right when they
were out on the town.
Within moments after they arrived at the wagonmaker’s
shop, as he waited outside, George began hearing
snatches of loud argument behind the closed door. He’d
known the massa long enough to expect that sort of thing,
so he didn’t bother to listen; he was too busy sifting in his
mind through the tasks he had to take care of at home
before they left. The toughest one, he knew, would be the
job of culling seven more birds from the nineteen
magnificent specimens he had already trained to lethal
keenness. There was room in the wagon for only a dozen,
and selecting them would challenge not only his own
judgment and the massa’s but also that of Uncle Mingo,
who was once again up, out, and about, as vinegary and
tart-tongued as ever.
Inside the shop, Massa Lea’s voice had risen to a shout:
The inexcusable delay in finishing the wagon had cost him
money, which should be deducted from the price. The
wagonmaker was yelling back that he had rushed the job
as fast as he could, and the price should really be higher
because cost of materials had risen along with his free

black workmen’s outrageous salary demands. Listening
now, Chicken George guessed that the massa was actually
less angry than he seemed and was simply testing the
wagonmaker to see if an argument might succeed in
cutting at least a few dollars off the cost of the wagon.
After a while something must have worked out inside, for
the altercation seemed to end, and soon Massa Lea and
the wagonmaker came out, still red-faced but acting and
talking now in a friendly way. The tradesman shouted
toward the area behind his shop, and a few more minutes
later, four blacks hove into view, bent nearly double pulling
the heavy new custom-built wagon behind them. George’s
eyes went wide at its sheer craftsmanship and beauty. He
could feel the strength in its oaken frame and body. The
center section of the luxuriously long bed showed the tops
of the twelve removable cock coops. The iron axles and the
hubs were obviously superbly balanced and greased, for
despite the vehicle’s imposing weight, he could hear no
creaking or even rubbing sounds at all. Nor had he ever
seen Massa Lea’s face split into such a grin.
“She’s one of the best we’ve ever turned out!” exclaimed
the wagonmaster. “Nearly too pretty to drive!” Expansively,
Massa Lea said, “Well, she’s about to roll a long way!” The
wagonmaker’s head wagged. “New Orleans! That’s a sixweek trip. Who all’s goin’ with you?”
Massa Lea turned, gesturing at Chicken George on the
old wagon driver’s seat. “My nigger there and twelve
chickens!”
Anticipating the massa’s command, Chicken George
jumped down and went back to untie the pair of rented
mules they’d brought along and led them over to the new
wagon. One of the four blacks helped him hitch them up,
then went back to join the others, who were paying Chicken
George no more attention than he was to them; after all,
they were free blacks, whom Massa Lea often said he
couldn’t stand the sight of. After walking around the wagon
a few times with his eyes shining and a big smile on his
face, the massa shook hands with the wagonmaker,
thanked him, and climbed proudly up onto the seat of the

new wagon. Wishing him good luck, the wagonmaker stood
there shaking his head in admiration for his own work as
Massa Lea led the way out of the lot with Chicken George
following in the old wagon.
On the long drive home—his new derby on the seat
beside him, along with a pair of elegant gray felt spats that
had set him back a dollar—George finished his mental
checklist of chores that he had to take care of before they
left for New Orleans, and started thinking about what had to
be done to make sure things would keep running smoothly
while they were gone. As difficult as he knew it would be to
get along without him at home, he was confident that
Matilda and Kizzy would be equal to the task; and though
Uncle Mingo didn’t get around quite as spryly anymore, and
he was becoming increasingly forgetful with each passing
year, George was sure the old man would be able to mind
the chickens adequately until his return. But sooner or later,
he knew he was going to need more help than Mingo would
be able to offer anymore.
Somehow he must find a way around his wife’s and his
mammy’s blindness to the rare opportunity he felt he could
open for young Virgil, especially since at nearly six years of
age the boy would soon have to start working in the fields.
During his absence, it had occurred to him that Virgil could
be assigned to help Uncle Mingo with the gamecocks—
and then simply kept on in the job after they returned—but
he had hardly brought up the idea before Matilda had
flared, “Let massa buy somebody to help ’im, den!” and
Kizzy had put in hotly, “Dem chickens done stole ’ nough
from dis family!” Wanting no new fights with them, he hadn’t
tried to force the matter, but certainly didn’t intend to see
the massa possibly buy some total stranger to intrude in his
and Uncle Mingo’s private province.
Even if the massa knew better than to bring in an
outsider, though, George couldn’t be sure if Virgil’s help
would be accepted by Uncle Mingo, who seemed to be
rankling more and more ever since his first helper had
developed with the massa a relationship closer than his
own. Only recently, in his bitterness about not being allowed

to come along with them to New Orleans, Mingo had
snapped, “You an’ massa figger y’all can trust me to feed
de chickens while you’s gone?” George wished that Uncle
Mingo would realize that he had nothing to do with the
massa’s decisions. At the same time, he wondered why the
old man wouldn’t simply face the fact that at seventy-odd
years of age, he just wasn’t in any kind of shape to travel for
six weeks in either direction; almost surely he would fall
sick somewhere, with all of the extra problems that would
present to him and the massa. George wished hard that he
knew some way to make Uncle Mingo feel better about the
whole thing or at least that Uncle Mingo would stop blaming
him for everything.
Finally the two wagons turned off the big road and were
rolling down the driveway. They were almost halfway to the
big house when, to his amazement, he saw Missis Lea
come onto the front porch and down the steps. A moment
later, out the back door, came Miss Malizy. Then, hurrying
from their cabins, he saw Matilda and their boys, Mammy
Kizzy, Sister Sarah, and Uncle Pompey. What are they all
doing here Thursday afternoon, wondered George, when
they should be out in the fields? Were they so anxious to
see the fine new wagon that they had risked the massa’s
anger? Then he saw their faces, and he knew that none of
them cared anything about any new wagon.
When Missis Lea kept walking on to meet the massa’s
wagon, George reined to a halt and leaned far over from
his high driver’s seat to hear better what she said to the
massa. George saw the massa’s body jerk upright as the
missis fled back toward the house. Dumbfounded, George
watched as Massa Lea clambered down from the new
wagon and walked slowly, heavily back toward him. He saw
the face, pale with shock—and suddenly he knew! The
massa’s words reached him as if from a distance: “Mingo’s
dead.”
Slumping sideways against the wagonseat, George was
bawling as he never had before. He hardly felt the massa
and Uncle Pompey half wrestling him onto the ground. Then
Pompey on one side and Matilda on the other were guiding

him toward slave row with others around them weeping
afresh at seeing his grief. Matilda helped him to lurch inside
their cabin, followed by Kizzy with the baby.
When he had recovered himself, they told him what had
happened. “Y’all left Monday mornin’,” said Matilda, “an’ dat
night nobody here slept no good. Seem like Tuesday
morning we all got up feelin’ like we’d heared whole lots’a
hoot owls an’ barkin’ dogs. Den we heared de
screamin’—”
“Was Malizy!” exclaimed Kizzy. “Lawd, she hollered! Us
all jes’ flew out dere where she’d done gone to slop de
hogs. An’ dere he was. Po’ ol’ soul layin’ out on de road,
look like some pile o’ rags!”
He was still alive, said Matilda, but “was jes’ one side o’
his mouth movin’. I got right down close on my knees an’
could jes’ barely make out he was whisperin’. ‘B’lieve I
done had a stroke,’ he say. ‘He’p me wid de chickens ... I
ain’t able—’”
“Lawd have mercy, none us knowed what to do!” said
Kizzy, but Uncle Pompey tried to lift the limp, heavy form.
When he failed, their combined efforts finally succeeded in
lugging Uncle Mingo back to slave row and onto Pompey’s
bed.
“George, he stunk so bad, wid dat sick smell on ’im!”
said Matilda. “We commence fannin’ his face, an’ he kept
whisperin’, ‘de chickens ... got to git back—’”
“Miss Malizy done run an’ tol’ missis by den,” said Kizzy,
“an’ she come a-wringin’ her hands an’ cryin’ an’ carryin’
on! But not’bout Br’er Mingo! Naw! First thing she hollerin’
was somebody better git to dem chickens less’n massa
have a fit! So Matilda called Virgil—”
“I sho’ didn’t want to!” said Matilda. “You know how I
feels’bout dat. One of us ’nough down wid dem chickens.
’Sides, I done heared you talkin’ ’bout stray dogs an’ foxes,
even wildcats be’s roun’ tryin’ to eat dem birds! But bless
de chile’s heart! His eyes was bucked scairt, but he say,
‘Mammy, I go, I jes’ don’ know what to do!’ Uncle Pompey
got a sack o’ corn an’ say, ‘You throw han’ful dis to any
chickens you sees, an’ I be down dere soon’s I can—’”

With no way to reach him and the massa, and Sister
Sarah’s telling them that she feared Uncle Mingo was
beyond what her roots could cure, and not even the missis
knowing how to contact any doctor, “weren’t nothin’ else us
could do ’cept jes’ wait on y’all—” they told him. Matilda
began weeping, and George reached out to hold her hand.
“She cryin’ ’cause when we got back in Pompey’s cabin
after talkin’ to the missis, Mingo gone,” said Kizzy. “ Lawd!
Knowed it jes’ to look at ’im!” She began sobbing herself.
“Po’ ol’ soul done died all by hisself.”
When Missis Lea was told, said Matilda, “she
commence hollerin’ she jes’ don’t know what to do wid
dead peoples, ’cept she done heared massa say dey
starts to rottin’ if dey’s kept out mo’n a day. She say be
’way past dat fo’ y’all git back, so us gwine have to dig a
hole—”
“Lawd!” exclaimed Kizzy. “Below de willow grove de
groun’ kin’ o’ sof. We took de shovel, Pompey an’ us
wimmins dug an’ dug, one at de time, ’til we had a hole
enough to put ’im in. We come back, den Pompey bathed
’im up.”
“He rubbed some glycerin on ’im Miss Malizy got from
missy,” said Matilda, “den sprinkled on some dat perfume
you brung me las’ year.”
“Weren’t no decent clothes to put ’im in,” continued Kizzy.
“De ones he had on stunk too bad, an’ what l’il Pompey
have was ’way too tight, so jes’ rolled ’im up in two sheets.”
She said Uncle Pompey then had cut two straight green
limbs while the women found old planks, and they had
fashioned a litter. “Have to say for missis dat when she
seen us all bearin’ ’im over to de hole,” said Matilda, “she
did come a-runnin’ wid dey Bible. When we got ’im dere,
she read some Scripture, from de Psalms, an’ den I
prayed, axin’ de Lawd to please res’ an’ keep Mr. Mingo’s
soul—” Then they had put the body in the grave and
covered it.
“We done ’im de bes’ we could! Don’t care if you’s mad,”
Matilda burst out, misreading the anguish on her husband’s
face.

Grabbing her and squeezing her fiercely, he rasped,
“Nobody mad—” too stifled by his emotions to convey in
words his anger with himself and the massa for not being
there that morning. There might have been something they
could have done to save him.
A little later, he left his cabin thinking about what concern,
care, even love had been shown to Uncle Mingo by those
who had always claimed to dislike him so. Seeing Uncle
Pompey, he walked over and wrung his hands, and they
talked a little while. Nearly as old as Uncle Mingo had been,
Pompey said he had just come up from the gamefowl area,
leaving Virgil watching the chickens. “Dat a good boy y’all
got, he sho’ is!” Then he said, “When you goes down dere,
since it ain’t been no rain, you can still see in de dus’ o’ de
road de crooked trail where Br’er Mingo dragged hisself all
de way up here in de night.”
George didn’t want to see that. Leaving Uncle Pompey,
he walked slowly to below the willow grove. Awhile passed
before he could look directly at the freshly mounded earth.
Moving about as if in a daze, picking up some rocks, he
arranged them in a design around the grave. He felt
unworthy.
In order to avoid Mingo’s dust trail in the road, he cut
through a field of broken cornstalks to reach the gamefowl
area.
“You done a good job, boy. Now you better go on back
up to your mammy,” he said, patting Virgil roughly on the
head, thrilling the boy with his first compliment. After he was
gone, George sat down and stared at nothing, his mind
tumbling with scenes from the past fifteen years, listening to
echoes of his teacher, his friend, his nearest to a father he
ever had known. He could almost hear the cracked voice
barking orders, speaking more gently of gamecocking;
complaining bitterly about being cast aside: “You an’

massa figger y’all can trust me to feed de chickens whilst
y’all’s gone?” George felt himself drowning in remorse.
Questions came to him: Where was Uncle Mingo from
before Massa Lea bought him? Who had been his family?
He had never mentioned any. Had he a wife or children

somewhere? George had been the closest person in the
world to Uncle Mingo, yet he knew so little about the man
who had taught him everything he knew.
Chicken George paced: Dear God, where was the
beloved old shambling companion with whom he had so
many times trod every inch of this familiar place?
He stayed there alone through the next day and night. It
was Saturday morning before Massa Lea showed up. His
face bleak and somber, he went directly to the point. “I’ve
been thinking through this whole thing. To start with, just
burn Mingo’s cabin, now. That’s the best way to get rid of
it.”
A few minutes later they stood and watched as the
flames consumed the small cabin that for over forty years
had been home to Uncle Mingo. Chicken George sensed
that the massa had something else on his mind; he was
unprepared for it when it came.
“I’ve been thinking about New Orleans,” said the massa.
“There’s too much at stake unless everything’s right—” He
spoke slowly, almost as if he were talking to himself. “Can’t
leave without somebody here to mind these chickens. Take
too much time to find somebody, maybe have to teach
them to boot. No point in me goin’ by myself, that much
driving and twelve birds to look after. No point goin’ to a
chicken fight unless you aim to win. Just foolish to make the
trip now—”
Chicken George swallowed. All those months of planning
... all the massa’s spending ... all of the massa’s hopes to
join the South’s most elite gamecocking circles ... those
birds so magnificently trained to beat anything with wings.
Swallowing a second time, he said, “Yassuh.”

CHAPTER 99
Working by himself down there with the gamefowl was so
strange and lonely that Chicken George wondered how in
the world Uncle Mingo had managed to do it for over
twenty-five years before he came to join him. “When massa
bought me,” the old man had told him, “an’ de flock got to
growin’, he kept sayin’ he gwine buy me some he’p, but he
never did, an’ I reckon I jes’ fin’ out chickens maybe better
company dan peoples is.” Though George felt that he, too,
loved the birds about as much as any man could, with him
they could never take the place of people. But he needed
someone to help him, he told himself, not to keep him
company.
As far as he was concerned, Virgil still seemed the most
sensible choice. It would keep things all in the family, and
he could train the boy just as Uncle Mingo had trained him.
But since he wasn’t anxious to deal with Matilda and Kizzy
in order to get him, George tried to think of some gamefowl
trainer acquaintance whom he might be able to persuade
the massa to buy away from his present owner. But he
knew that any real gamecocker massa would have to be in
some truly desperate fix for money to even think about
selling his trainer, especially to such a competitor as
Massa Lea. So he began considering black hackfighters,
but a good half of them were trainers like himself fighting
their massa’s cull birds, and most of the others, like their
birds, were third-raters or shady characters who fought very
good birds that had been suspiciously acquired. There
were a number of free black hackfighters he had seen who
were really good, and were available for hire by the day, the
week, the month, or even the year, but he knew there was
no way Massa Lea would ever permit even the best freeblack trainer in North Carolina on his place. So George had
no choice. And finally one evening he mustered his nerve to
bring it up at home.
“Fo’ you tells me ag’in why you won’t stan’ fo’ it, woman,

you listen to me. Nex’ time massa want me to travel wid ’im
somewhere, dat’s when he sho’ gwine say, ‘Go git dat
oldes’ young’un of your’n down here!’ An’ once dat happen,
Virgil be wid chickens to stay, less’n massa say different,
which might be never, an’ you or me neither can’t say a
mumblin’ word—” He gestured to stop Matilda from
interrupting. “Wait! Ain’t wantin’ no back talk! I’se tryin’ to git
you to see de boy need to come on down dere now. If ’n I
bring’im, den he can stay jes’ long ’nough fo’ me to teach
’im how to feed de birds when I has to leave, an’ he’p me
exercise ’em durin’ trainin’ season. Den res’ de time, mos’
de year, he can be wid y’all in de fiel’.” Seeing Matilda’s
tight expression, he shrugged elaborately and said with
mock resignation, “Awright, I jes’ leave it up to you an’
massa, den!”
“What git me is you talk like Virgil grown awready,” said
Matilda. “Don’ you realize dat chile ain’t but six years ol’?
Jes’ half de twelve you was when dey drug you off down
dere.” She paused. “But I knows he got to work now he’s
six. So reckon can’t do nothin’ ’cept what you says, much
as I jes’ gits mad every time I thinks ’bout how dem
chickens stole you!”
“Anybody listen to you an’ mammy! Y’all soun’ like
chickens done snatched me up an’ off crost de ocean
somewheres!”
“Jes’ well’s to, mos’ de time, much as you’s gone.”
“Gone! Who settin’ up here talkin’ to you? Who been
here every day dis month?”
“Dis month maybe, but where you gwine be fo’ long?”
“If you’s talkin’ ’bout de fightin’ season, I be wherever
massa tell me we’s gwine. If you talkin’ ’bout right now,
soon’s I eats, I sho ain’t gwine set here ’til some varmints
creeps roun’ down dere an’ eats some chickens, or den I
really be gone!”
“Oh! You’s finally ’greein’ he’d sell you, too!”
“I b’lieves he sell missis, she let his chickens git et!”
“Look,” she said, “we done got by widout no big fallin’ out
’bout Virgil, so let’s sho’ don’t start none ’bout nothin’ else.”
“I ain’t arguin’ in de firs’ place, it’s you de one!”

“Awright, George, I’se through wid it,” Matilda said,
setting steaming bowls on the table. “Jes’ eat yo’ supper
an’ git on back, an’ I sen’ Virgil down dere in de mornin’.
Less’n you wants to take ’im back wid you now. I can go git
’im from over at ’is gran’mammy’s.”
“Naw, tomorrow be fine.”
But within a week it became clear to Chicken George
that his eldest son lacked totally what had been his own
boyhood fascination with gamebirds. Six years old or not, it
seemed inconceivable to George that after completing an
assigned task, Virgil would either wander off and play
alone, or just sit down somewhere and do nothing. Then
Virgil would leap up as his father angrily exclaimed, “Git up
from dere! What you think dis is? Dese ain’t no pigs down
dere, dese fightin’ chickens!” Then Virgil would do
acceptably well whatever new task he was set to, but then
once more, as George watched from the corner of his eye,
he would see his son soon either sitting down again or
going off to play. Fuming, he remembered how, as a boy,
he had spent what little free time he had scampering
around admiring the cockerels and the stags, plucking
grass and catching grasshoppers to feed them, finding it all
incredibly exciting.
Though Uncle Mingo’s way of training had been cool and
businesslike—an order given, a watchful silence, then
another order—George decided to try another approach
with Virgil in hopes that he’d snap out of it. He’d talk to him.
“What you been doin’ wid yo’self up yonder?”
“Nothin’, Pappy.”
“Well, is you an’ de other young’uns gittin’ ’long all right
an’ mindin’ yo’ mammy an’ gran’mammy?”
“Yassuh.”
“Reckon dey feeds you pretty good, huh?”
“Yassuh.”
“What you like to eat de mos’?”
“Anythin’ Mammy cooks us, yassuh.”
The boy seemed to lack even the faintest imagination.
He’d try a different tack.
“Lemme hear you tell de story ’bout yo’ great-gran’daddy

like you done once.”
Virgil obediently did so, rather woodenly. George’s heart
sank. But after standing there thoughtfully for a moment, the
boy asked, “Pappy, is you seed my great-gran’pappy?”
“Naw, I ain’t,” he replied hopefully. “I knows ’bout ’im
same as you does, from yo’ gran’mammy.”
“She used to ride in de buggy wid ’im!”
“Sho’ she did! It was her pappy. Jes’ like one dese days
you tell yo’ chilluns you used to set down here ’mongst de
chickens wid yo’ pappy.”
That seemed to confuse Virgil, who fell silent.
After a few more such lame efforts, George reluctantly
gave up, hoping that he’d have better luck with Ashford,
George, and Tom. Without communicating to anyone his
disappointment in Virgil, he regretfully decided to use the
boy for the simple part-time duties he had discussed with
Matilda, rather than try futilely to train him as a full-time
permanent helper as he had actually intended.
So when Chicken George felt Virgil had mastered the
task of feeding and watering the cockerels and stags in
their pens three times daily, he sent him back up to Matilda
to begin working with them in the fields—which seemed to
suit the boy just fine. Chicken George would never have
breathed it to Matilda, Kizzy, or the others, but George had
always felt a deep disdain for field work, which he saw as
nothing more than a ceaseless drudge of wielding hoes
under hot sun, dragging cottonsacks, picking endless
tobacco worms, and beating cornstalks down for fodder, in
relentless seasonal succession. With a chuckle he
remembered Uncle Mingo’s saying, “Gimmme a good corn
or cotton field or a good fightin’ bird, I’ll take de bird every
time!” It was exhilarating just to think of how anywhere a
cockfight had been announced—if it was in a woods, an
open cow pasture, or behind some massa’s barn—the very
air would become charged as gamecockers began
converging on it with their birds raucously crowing in their
lust to win or die.
In this summertime off-season, with the gamecocks
moulting off their old feathers, there was only routine work

to be done, and Chicken George gradually became
accustomed to not having anyone around to talk with,
except for the chickens—in particular the pinfeathered
veteran catchcock that had been practically Uncle Mingo’s
pet.
“You could o’ tol’ us how sick he was, you ol’ wall-eyed
devil!” he told the old bird one afternoon, at which it cocked
its head for a second, as if aware that it was being
addressed, and then went on pecking and scratching in its
ever-hungry way. “You hears me talkin’ to you!” George
said with amiable gruffness. “You must o’ knowed he was
real bad off!” For a while he let his eyes idly follow the
foraging bird. “Well, I reckon you knows he’s gone now. I
wonders if you’s missin’ de ol’ man de way I is.” But the old
catchcock, pecking and scratching away, seemed not to be
missing anyone, and finally Chicken George sent him
squawking off with a tossed pebble.
In another year or so, George reflected, the old bird will
probably join Uncle Mingo wherever it is that old
gamecockers and their birds go when they die. He
wondered what had ever happened to the massa’s very
first bird—that twenty-five-cent raffle-ticket gamecock that
had gotten him started more than forty years ago. Did it
finally catch a fatal gaff? Or did it die an honored
catchcock’s death of old age? Why hadn’t he ever asked
Uncle Mingo about that? He must remember to ask the
massa. Over forty years back! The massa had told him he
was only seventeen when he had won the bird. That would
make him around fifty-six or fifty-seven now—around thirty
years older than Chicken George. Thinking of the massa,
and of how he owned people, as well as chickens, all their
lives, he found himself pondering what it must be like not to
belong to someone. What would it feel like to be “free”? It
must not be all that good or Massa Lea, like most whites,
wouldn’t hate free blacks so much. But then he
remembered what a free black woman who had sold him
some white lightning in Greensboro had told him once.
“Every one us free show y’all plantation niggers livin’ proof
dat jes’ bein’ a nigger don’ mean you have to be no slave.

Yo’ massa don’ never want you thinkin’ nothin’ ’bout dat.”
During his long solitudes in the gamefowl area, Chicken
George began to think about that at length. He decided he
was going to strike up conversation with some of the free
blacks he always saw but had always ignored when he and
the massa went to the cities.
Walking along the split-rail fence, feeding and watering
the cockerels and stags, Chicken George enjoyed as
always the stags’ immature clucking angrily at him, as if
they were rehearsing their coming savagery in the cockpits.
He found himself thinking a lot about being owned.
One afternoon, while he was on one of his periodic
inspections of the birds that were maturing out on the
rangewalk, he decided to amuse himself by trying out his
nearly perfect imitation of a challenging cock’s crow.
Almost always in the past, it would bring instantly forth a
furious defender crowing angrily in reply and jerking its
head this way and that in search of the intruding rival he
was sure he had just heard. Today was no exception. But
the magnificent gamecock that burst from the underbrush in
response to his call stood beating its wings explosively
against its body for almost half a minute before its crow
seemed to shatter the autumn afternoon. The bright sunlight
glinted off its iridescent plumage. Its carriage was powerful
and ferocious, from the glittering eyes to the stout yellow
legs with their lethal spurs. Every ounce, every inch of him
symbolized its boldness, spirit, and freedom so
dramatically that Chicken George left vowing this bird must
never be caught and trained and trimmed. It must remain
there with its hens among the pines—untouched and free!

CHAPTER 100
The new cockfighting season was fast approaching, but
Massa Lea hadn’t mentioned New Orleans. Chicken
George hadn’t really expected him to; somehow he had
known that trip was never going to happen. But he and the
massa made a very big impression at the local “mains”
when they showed up in their gleaming, custom-built,
twelve-coop wagon. And their luck was running good.
Massa Lea averaged almost four wins out of five, and
George, using the best of the culls, did just about as well in
the Caswell County hackfights. It was a busy season as well
as a profitable one, but George happened to be home
again when his fifth son was born late that year. Matilda
said she wanted to name this one James. She said “James
somehow ’nother always been my fav’rite ’mongst all de
Disciples.” Chicken George agreed, with a private
grimace.
Wherever he and Massa Lea traveled for any distance
now, it seemed that he would hear of increasing bitterness
against white people. On their most recent trip, a free black
had told George about Osceola, chief of the Seminole
Indians in the state called Florida. When white men
recaptured Osceola’s black wife, an escaped slave, he had
organized a war party of two thousand Seminoles and
escaped black slaves to track and ambush a detachment
of the U. S. Army. Over a hundred soldiers were killed,
according to the story, and a much larger Army force was
hard after Osceola’s men, who were running, hiding, and
sniping from their trails and recesses in the Florida
swamps.
And the cockfight season of 1836 hadn’t long ended
when Chicken George heard that at someplace called “The
Alamo,” a band of Mexicans had massacred a garrison of
white Texans, including a woodsman named Davey
Crockett, who was famous as a friend and defender of the
Indians. Later that year, he heard of greater white losses to

the Mexicans, under a General Santa Anna, who was said
to boast of himself as the greatest cockfighter in the world;
if that was true, George wondered why he’d never heard of
him till now.
It was during the spring of the next year when George
returned from a trip to tell slave row still another
extraordinary piece of news. “Done heared it from de
co’thouse janitor nigger at de county seat, dat new
Pres’dent Van Buren done ordered de Army to drive all de
Indians wes’ de Mis’sippi River!”
“Soun’ for sho’ now like gwine be dem Indians’ River
Jordan!” said Matilda.
“Dat’s what Indians gittin’ for lettin’ in white folks in dis
country, in de firs’ place,” said Uncle Pompey. “Whole heap
o’ folks,’cludin’ me till I got grown, ain’t knowed at firs’
weren’t nobody in dis country but Indians, fishin’ an’ huntin’
an’ fightin’ one ’nother, jes’ mindin’ dey own business. Den
here come l’il ol’ boat o’ white folks a-wavin’ an’ grinnin’.
‘Hey, y’all red mens! How ’bout let us come catch a bite an’
a nap ’mongst y’all an’ le’s be friends!’ Huh! I betcha
nowdays dem Indians wish dey’s made dat boat look like a
porcupine wid dey arrows!”
After the massa attended the next Caswell County
landholders’ meeting, Chicken George came back with still
more news about the Indians. “Hear tell it’s a Gen’l Winfield
Scott done warned ’em dat white folks bein’ Christians ain’t
wantin’ to shed no mo’ Indians’ blood, so dem wid any
sense best to hurry up an’ git to movin’! Hear tell if a Indian
even look like he wanted to fight, de sojers shot ’im in ’is
tracks! An’ den de Army commence drivin’ jes’ thousan’s
dem Indians toward somewheres called Oklahoma. Say
ain’t no tellin’ how many ’long de way was kilt or took sick
an’ died—”
“Jes’ evil, evil!” exclaimed Matilda.
But there was some good news, too—only this time it
was waiting for him when he got home from one of his trips
in 1837: His sixth son in a row was born. Matilda named
him Lewis, but after finding out where she got the name for
James, Chicken George decided not even to inquire why.

Less exuberant than she’d been at the birth of each
previous grandchild, Kizzy said, “Look like to me y’all ain’t
gwine never have nothin’ but boys!”
“Mammy Kizzy, bad as I’se layin’ up here hurtin’ an’ you
soundin’ disappointed!” cried Matilda from the bed.
“Ain’t neither! I loves my gran’boys an’ y’all knows it. But
jes’ seem like y’all could have one gal!”
Chicken George laughed. “We git right to work on a gal
for you, Mammy!”
“You git out’n here!” exclaimed Matilda.
But only a few months passed before a look at Matilda
made it clear that George intended to be a man of his
word.
“Hmph! Sho’ can tell when dat man been spendin’ reg’lar
time home!” commented Sister Sarah. “Seem like he
wuss’n dem roosters!” Miss Malizy agreed.
When her pains of labor came once again, the waiting,
pacing George heard—amid his wife’s anguished moans
and cries—his mother’s yelps of “Thank you, Jesus! Thank
you, Jesus!,” and he needed no further advisement that at
last he had fathered a girl.
Even before the baby was cleaned off, Matilda told her
mother-in-law that she and George had agreed years
before that their first girl would be named Kizzy.
“Ain’t done lived in vain!” Gran’mammy cried at intervals
throughout the rest of the day. Nothing would do for her then
but that the following afternoon Chicken George would
come up from the gamefowl area and tell once again about
the African great-gran’pappy Kunta Kinte for the six boys
and the infant Kizzy in his lap.
One night about two months later, with all of the children
finally asleep, George asked, “’Tilda, how much money is
we got saved up?”
She looked at him, surprised. “L’il over a hunnud dollars.”
“Dat all?”
“Dat all! It’s a wonder it’s dat much! Ain’t I been tellin’ you
all dese years de way you spends ain’t hardly no point even
do no talkin’ ’bout no savin’!”
“Awright, awright,” he said guiltily.

But Matilda pursued the point. “Not countin’ what you
winned an’ spent what I ain’t never seed, which was yo’
business, you want to guess ’bout how much you done give
me to save since we been married, den you borrowin’
back?”
“Awright, how much?”
Matilda paused for effect. “Twixt three-fo’ thousan’
dollars.”
“Wheeeew!” he whistled. “I is?”
Watching his expression change, she sensed that she
had never observed him grow more serious in all their
twelve years together. “Off down yonder by myself so
much,” he said finally, “I been thinkin’ ’bout whole heap o’
things—” He paused. She thought he seemed almost
embarrassed by whatever he was about to say. “One thing I
been thinkin’, if’n us could save ’nough dese nex’ comin’
years, maybe us could buy ourselves free.”
Matilda was too astounded to speak.
He gestured impatiently. “I wish you git yo’ pencil to
figger some, an’ quit buckin’ yo’ eyes at me like you ain’t
got no sense!”
Still stunned, Matilda got her pencil and a piece of paper
and sat back down at the table.
“Trouble to start wid,” he said, “jes’ can’t do nothin’ but
guess roun’ what massa’d ax for us all. Me an’ you an’ de
passel o’ young’uns. Start wid you. Roun’ de county seat, I
knows men fiel’ han’s is bringin’’bout a thousan’ dollars
apiece. Wimmins is worth less, so le’s call you’bout eight
hunnud—” Getting up, bending to inspect Matilda’s moving
pencil, he sat back down. “Den let’s say massa let us have
our chilluns, all eight, ’bout three hunnud apiece—”
“Ain’t but seb’n!” said Matilda.
“Dat new one you say started in yo’ belly ag’in make
eight!”
“Oh!” she said, smiling. She figured at length. “Dat make
twenty-fo’ hunnud—”
“Jes’ for chilluns?” His tone mingled doubt with outrage.
Matilda refigured. “Eight threes is twenty-fo’. Plus de eight
hunnud fo’ me, dat make ’zactly thirty hunnud—dat’s same

as three thousan’.”
“Wheeeew!”
“Don’t carry on so yet! De big one you!” She looked at
him. “How much you figger fo’ you?”
Serious as it was, he couldn’t resist asking, “What you
think I’se worth?”
“If I’d o’ knowed, I’d o’ tried to buy you from massa
myself.” They both laughed. “George, I don’ even know how
come we’s talkin’ sich as dis, nohow. You know good an’
well massa ain’t gwine never sell you!”
He didn’t answer right away. But then he said, “’Tilda, I
ain’t never mentioned dis, reckon since I know you don’t
hardly even like to hear massa’s name called. But I betcha
twenty-five different times, one or ’nother, he done talk to
me ’bout whenever he git ’nough together to buil’ de fine
big house he want, wid six columns crost de front, he say
him an’ missis could live off’n what de crops make, an’ he
’speck he be gittin’ out’n de chicken-fightin’ business, he
say he steady gittin’ too ol’ to keep puttin’ up wid all de
worries.”
“I have to see dat to b’lieve it, George. Him or you neither
ain’t gwine never give up messin’ wid chickens!”
“I’m tellin’ you what he say! If you can listen! Looka here,
Uncle Pompey say massa ’bout sixty-three years ol’ right
now. Give ’im another five, six years—it ain’t easy fo’ no
real ol’ man to keep runnin’ here an’ yonder fightin’ no
birds! I didn’t pay ’im much ’tention neither till I kept thinkin’
dat, yeah, he really might let us buy ourselves, an ’specially
if we be payin’ him ’nough would he’p ’im buil’ dat big
house he want.”
“Hmph,” Matilda grunted without conviction. “Awright, let’s
talk ’bout it. What you reckon he’d want for you?”
“Well—” His expression seemed to mingle pride in one
way and pain in another at what he was about to say. “Well
—nigger buggy driver o’ dat rich Massa Jewett done swo.’
up an’ down to me one time dat he overheard his massa
tellin’ somebody he’d offered Massa Lea fo’ thousan’
dollars fo’ me—”
“Whooooooee!” Matilda was flabbergasted.

“See, you ain’t never knowed de valuable nigger you
sleeps wid!” But quickly he was serious again. “I don’t really
b’lieve dat nigger. I’speck he jes’ made up dat lie tryin’ to
see if I’d be fool ’nough to swallow it. Anyhow, I go by
what’s gittin’ paid nowdays for niggers wid de bes’ trades,
like de carpenters an’ blacksmiths, sich as dem. Dey’s
sellin’ twix two-three thousan’, I knows dat fo’ a fac’—” He
paused, peering at her waiting pencil. “Put down three
thousan’—” He paused again. “How much dat be?”
Matilda figured. She said then that the total estimated
cost to buy their family would be sixty-two hundred dollars.
“But what’bout Mammy Kizzy?”
“I git to Mammy!” he said impatiently. He thought.
“Mammy gittin’ pretty ol’ now, dat he’p her cost less—”
“Dis year she turnin’ fifty,” said Matilda.
“Put down six hunnud dollars.” He watched the pencil
move. “Now what dat?”
Matilda’s face strained with concentration. “Now it’s
sixty-eight hunnud dollars.”
“Whew! Sho’ make you start to see niggers is money to
white folks.” George spoke very slowly. “But I ’clare I
b’lieves I can hackfight an’ do it. ’Cose, gon’ mean waitin’
an’ savin’ up a long time—” He noticed that Matilda
seemed discomfited. “I knows right what’s on yo’ mind,” he
said. “Miss Malizy, Sister Sarah, an’ Uncle Pompey.”
Matilda looked grateful that he knew. He said, “Dey’s
family to me even fo’ dey was to you—”
“Lawd, George!” she exclaimed, “jes’ don’t see how jes’
one man s’posed to be tryin’ to buy ever’body, but I sho’
jes’ couldn’t walk off an’ leave dem!”
“We got plenty time, ’Tilda. Let’s us jes’ cross dat bridge
when we gits to it.”
“Dat’s de truth, you right.” She looked down at the figures
that she had written. “George, I jes’ can’t hardly b’lieve we’s
talkin’ ’bout what we is—” She felt herself beginning to dare
to believe it, that the two of them, together, were actually
engaging for the first time in a monumental family
discussion. She felt an intense urge to spring around the
table and embrace him as tightly as she could. But she felt

too much to move—or even speak for a few moments.
Then she asked, “George, how come you got to thinkin’
dis?”
He was quiet for a moment. “I got by myself, an’ seem
like I jes’ got to thinkin’ mo’, like I tol’ you—”
“Well,” she said softly, “sho’ is nice.”
“We ain’t gittin’ nowhere!” he exclaimed. “All we ever
doin’ is gittin’ massa somewhere!” Matilda felt like shouting
“Jubilee!” but made herself keep still. “I been talkin’ wid free
niggers when me an’ massa go to cities,” George went on.
“Dey say de free niggers up Nawth is de bes’ off. Say dem
lives ’mongst one ’nother in dey own houses, an’ gits good
jobs. Well, I know I can git me a job! Plenty cockfightin’ up
Nawth! Even famous cockfightin’ niggers I’se heared live
right in dat New Yawk City, a Uncle Billy Roger, a Uncle
Pete what got a big flock an’ own a great big gamblin’ joint,
an’ another one call ‘Nigger Jackson’ dey say don’t nobody
beat his birds, hardly!” He further astounded Matilda. “An’
’nother thing—I wants to see our young’uns learnin’ to read
an’ write, like you can.”
“Lawd, better’n me, I hope!” Matilda exclaimed, her eyes
shining.
“An’ I wants ’em to learn trades.” Abruptly he grinned,
pausing for effect. “How you reckon you look settin’ in yo’
own house, yo’ own stuffed furniture, an’ all dem l’il
knickknacks? How ’bout Miss ’Tilda be axin’ de other free
nigger womens over for tea in de mornin’s, an’ y’all jes’
settin’ roun’ talkin’ ’bout rangin’ y’all’s flowers, an’ sich as
dat?”
Matilda burst into nearly shrieking laughter. “Lawd, man,
you is jes’ crazy!” When she stopped laughing, she felt
more love for him than she’d ever felt before. “I reckon de
Lawd is done give me what I needs dis night.” Eyes welling,
she put her hand on his. “You really think we can do it,
George?”
“What you think I’se been settin’ up here talkin’ ’bout,
woman?”
“You ’member de night we ’greed to marry, what I tol’
you?” His face said that he didn’t. “I tol’ you sump’n out’n de

first chapter o’ Ruth. Tol’ you, ‘Whither thou goes’, I will go,
an’ where thou lodgest, I will lodge; thy people shall be my
people—’ You don’t’member me sayin’ dat?”
“Yeah, I reckon.”
“Well, I ain’t never felt dat way more’n I does right now.”

CHAPTER 101
Removing his derby with one hand, with the other Chicken
George held out to Massa Lea a small water pitcher that
looked as if it were woven tightly of thick strands of wire.
“My boy, Tom, de one we done name for you, Massa, he
done made dis for his gran’mammy, but I jes’ want you to
see it.”
Looking dubious, Massa Lea took the pitcher by its
carved cowhorn handle and gave it a cursory inspection.
“Uh-huh,” he grunted noncommittally.
George realized that he’d have to try harder. “Yassuh,
made dat out’n jes’ ol’ rusty scrap barb wire, Massa. Built
’im a real hot charcoal fire an’ kept bendin’ an’ meltin’ one
wire ’gainst ’nother ’til he got de shape, den give it a kin’ o’
brazin’ all over. Dat Tom always been real handy, Massa—”
He halted again, wanting some response, but none
came.
Seeing that he’d have to reveal his real intent without
gaining the tactical advantage of some advance positive
reaction to Tom’s craftsmanship, George took the plunge.
“Yassuh, dis boy been so proud o’ carryin’ yo’ name all his
life, Massa, us all really b’lieves he jes’ git de chance, he
make you a good blacksmith—”
An instantly disapproving expression came upon Massa
Lea’s face, as if by reflex, and it fueled George’s
determination not to fail Matilda and Kizzy in his promise to
help Tom. He saw that he’d have to make what he knew
would be the strongest appeal to Massa Lea—picturing the
financial advantages.
“Massa, every year money you’s spendin’ on
blacksmithin’ you could be savin’! Ain’t none us never tol’
you how Tom awready been savin’ you some, sharpenin’
hoe blades an’ sickles an’ different other tools—well as
fixin’ lot o’ things gits broken roun’ here. Reason I brings it
up, when you sent me over for dat Isaiah nigger blacksmith
to put de new wheel rims on de wagon, he was tellin’ me

Massa Askew been years promisin’ him a helper dat he
need real bad, much work as he doin’ to make money fo’
his massa. He tol’ me he sho’ be glad to make a
blacksmith out’n any good boy he could git holt of, so I
thought right ’way ’bout Tom. If he was to learn, Massa, ain’t
jes’ he could do ever’ thing we needs roun’ here, but he
could be takin’ in work to make you plenty money jes’ like
dat Isaiah nigger doin’ for Massa Askew.”
George felt sure he’d struck a nerve, but he couldn’t be
sure, for the massa carefully showed no sign. “Looks to me
this boy of yours is spending more time making this kind of
stuff instead of working,” said Massa Lea, thrusting the
metal pitcher back into George’s hands.
“Tom ain’t missed a day since he started workin’ in yo’
fiel’s, Massa! He do sich as dis jes’ on Sundays when he
off! Ever since he been any size, seem like he got fixin’ an’
makin’ things in ’is blood! Every Sunday he out in dat l’il ol’
lean-to shed he done fixed hisself behin’ de barn, a-burnin’
an’ bangin’ on sump’n’nother. Fact, we’s been scairt he
’sturb you an’ de missis.”
“Well, I’ll think about it,” Massa Lea said, turning abruptly
and walking away, leaving Chicken George standing there
confused and frustrated—purposely, he felt sure—holding
the metal pitcher.
Miss Malizy was seated in the kitchen peeling turnips
when the massa walked in. She half turned around, no
longer springing to her feet as she would have done in
years past, but she didn’t think he’d mind, since she had
reached that point in age and service where some small
infractions could be permitted.
Massa Lea went straight to the point. “What about this
boy named Tom?”
“Tom? You means ’Tilda’s Tom, Massa?”
“Well, how many Toms’ out there? You know the one I
mean, what about him?”
Miss Malizy knew exactly why he was asking. Just a few
minutes before, Gran’mammy Kizzy had told her of Chicken
George’s uncertainty about how Massa Lea had reacted to
his proposal. Well, now she knew. But her opinion of young

Tom was so high—and not just because he’d made her
new S-curved pothooks—that she decided to hesitate a
few seconds before answering, in order to sound impartial.
“Well,” she said finally, “a body wouldn’t pick ’im out of a
crowd to talk to, Massa, ’cause de boy ain’t never been
much wid words. But I sho’ can tell you fo’ fac’ he de
smartes’ young’un out dere, an’ de goodest o’ dem big
boys, to boot!” Miss Malizy paused meaningfully. “An’ I
speck he gwine grow up to be mo’ man in whole lot o’ ways
dan his pappy is.”
“What are you talking about? What kind of ways?”
“Jes’ man ways, Massa. Mo’ solid, an’ ’pendable, an’ not
fo’ no foolishness no kin’ o’ way, an’ like dat. He gwine be
de kin’ o’ man make some woman a mighty good husban’.”
“Well, I hope he hasn’t got matin’ on his mind,” said
Massa Lea, probing, “’cause I just permitted it with that
oldest one—what’s his name?”
“Virgil, Massa.”
“Right. And every weekend he’s runnin’ off to bed down
with her over at the Curry plantation when he ought to be
here workin’!”
“Nawsuh, not Tom. He too young for sich as dat on his
min’, an’ I ’speck he won’t be too quick ’bout it even when
he git grown, leas’ not ’til he fin’ jes’ de right gal he want.”
“You’re too old to know about young bucks nowadays,”
said Massa Lea. “Wouldn’t surprise me if one left my plow
and mule in the field to go chasin’ some gal.”
“’Gree wid you if you talkin’ ’bout dat Ashford, Massa,
’cause he took to woman chasin’ jes’ like his pappy. But
Tom jes’ ain’t dat kin’, dat’s all.”
“Well, all right. If I go on what you say, the boy sounds like
he might be fit for something.”
“Go on what any us say ’bout him, Massa.” Miss Malizy
concealed her jubilation. “Don’ know what you axin’ ’bout
Tom fo’, but he sho’ de pick o’ dem big boys.”
Massa Lea broke the news to Chicken George five days
later.
“I’ve worked out an arrangement to board your Tom over
at the Askew plantation,” he announced solemnly, “for a

three-year apprenticeship with that nigger blacksmith
Isaiah.”
George was so elated that it was all he could do to keep
from picking up the massa and spinning him around.
Instead, he just grinned from ear to ear and began to
sputter his appreciation.
“You’d better be right about that boy, George. On the
strength of your assurances, I recommended him very
highly to Massa Askew. If he isn’t as good as you say, I’ll
have him back here so fast it’ll make your head spin, and if
he gets out of line, if he betrays my trust in any way, I’ll take
it out of your hide as his. Do you understand?”
“He won’t let you down, Massa. You got my promise on
dat. Dat boy a chip off de ol’ block.”
“That’s what I’m afraid of. Have him packed and ready to
leave in the mornin’.”
“Yassuh. An’ thank you, suh. You won’t never regret it.”
Racing up to slave row as soon as the massa was gone,
Chicken George was so near to bursting with pride in his
achievement when he told them the great news that he
didn’t see the wry smiles exchanged by Matilda and Kizzy,
who had been the ones responsible for urging him to
approach the massa in the first place. Soon he stood in the
doorway hollering, “Tom! Tom! You Tom!”
“Yaaay, Pappy!” His reply came from behind the barn.
“Boy, c’mere!”
A moment later Tom’s mouth was open as wide as his
eyes. The incredible news had come as a total surprise—
for they hadn’t wanted him to be disappointed if the effort
hadn’t worked. But as overjoyed as he was, their heaped
congratulations so embarrassed him that Tom got back
outside as quickly as he could—partly to give himself the
chance to realize that his dream had actually come true. He
hadn’t noticed while he was in the cabin that his little
sisters, Kizzy and Mary, had scampered outside and
breathlessly spread the news among their brothers.
The lanky Virgil was just trotting up from his chores in the
barn before leaving for the plantation of his recent bride; he
merely grunted something noncommittal under his breath

and hurried on past Tom, who smiled, since Virgil had been
in a daze ever since he had jumped the broom.
But Tom tensed when he saw stocky, powerful eighteenyear-old Ashford approaching, trailed by their younger
brothers James and Lewis. After nearly a lifetime of
unaccountable hostility between him and Ashford, Tom
wasn’t surprised at his snarling bitterness.
“You always been dey pet! Butterin’ up eve’ybody so you
gits de favors! Now you gwine off laughin’ at us still in de
fiel’!” He made a swift feint as if to strike Tom, drawing
gasps from James and Lewis. “I’m gon’ git you yet, jes’
watch!” And Ashford stalked off, Tom staring levelly after
him, certain that someday he and Ashford were going to
have a showdown.
What Tom heard from “L’il George” was another kind of
bitterness. “Sho’ wish I was you gittin’ way from here, fo’
pappy work me to death down dere! Jes’ cause I got his
name, he figger I’se s’posed to be crazy as he is ’bout
chickens. I hates dem stinkin’ things!”
As for the ten-year-old Kizzy and eight-year-old Mary,
having spread the news, they now trailed Tom around the
rest of the afternoon, their shy looks making it clear that he
was their adored and favorite big brother.
The next morning, after seeing Tom off in the mule cart
with Virgil, Kizzy, Sister Sarah, and Matilda had just begun
the day’s chopping in the field when Gran’mammy Kizzy
observed, “Anybody seen us all up dere snifflin’ an’ cryin’
an’ gwine on would o’ thought we weren’t gwine never see
dat chile ag’in.”
“Hmph! No mo’ chile, honey!” exclaimed Sister Sarah.
“Dat Tom de nex’ man roun’ dis place!”

CHAPTER 102
With a special traveling pass supplied by Massa Lea, Virgil
had hung a lantern on the mulecart and driven it through the
night before Thanksgiving in order to get Tom home from
the Askew plantation in time for the big dinner, after an
absence of nine months. As the cart rolled back into the
Lea driveway in the chilly November afternoon and Virgil
quickened the mule to a brisk trot, Tom had to press back
tears as the familiar slave row came into view and he saw
all of those whom he had missed so much standing there
waiting for him. Then they began waving and shouting, and
moments later, grasping his bag of the gifts that he had
made with his own hands for each of them, he jumped to
the ground amid the huggings and kissings of the
womenfolk.
“Bless ’is heart!” ... “He look so good!” ... “Don’t he now!
See how dem shoulders an’ arms done filled out!” ...
“Gran’mammy, leave me kiss Tom!” ... “Don’t squeeze ’im
all day, lem’me git holt of ’im too, chile!”
Over their shoulders, Tom caught a glimpse of his two
younger brothers, James and Lewis, wearing awed
expressions; he knew that L’il George was down among
the gamecocks with his father, and Virgil had told him that
Ashford had gotten the massa’s permission to visit a girl on
another plantation.
Then he saw the usually bedridden Uncle Pompey sitting
outside his cabin in an old cane chair, bundled in a heavy
quilt. As soon as he could maneuver clear, Tom hurried
over to shake the old man’s puffy, trembling hand, bending
closer to hear the cracked and almost whispery voice.
“Jes’ wants to make sho’ you’s really back to see us, boy
—”
“Yassuh, Uncle Pompey, mighty glad to git back!”
“Awright, see you later on,” the old man quavered.
Tom was having trouble with his emotions. In his now
sixteen years, not only had he never been treated so much

like a man, but also he had never before felt such an
outpouring of his slave-row family’s love and respect.
His two little sisters were still pulling and clamoring over
him when they heard a familiar voice trumpeting in the
distance.
“Lawd, here come Mr. Rooster!” exclaimed Matilda, and
the women went scurrying to set the Thanksgiving meal on
the table.
When Chicken George came striding into the slave-row
area, seeing Tom, he beamed. “Well, look what done got
loose an’ come home!” He clapped Tom heavily across the
shoulders with his hand. “Is you makin’ any money yet?”
“Nawsuh, not yet, Pappy.”
“What kin’ of blacksmith you is ain’t makin’ no money?”
demanded George in mock astonishment.
Tom remembered that he had always felt caught in a
windstorm whenever closely exposed to his father’s
bombastic way of expressing himself. “Long ways yet from
bein’ no blacksmith, Pappy, jes’ tryin’ to learn,” he said.
“Well, you tell dat Isaiah nigger I say hurry up an’ learn
you sump’n!”
“Yassuh,” said Tom mechanically, his mind flashing that
he could probably never master even so much as half of
what Mr. Isaiah was patiently making every effort to help
him learn. He asked, “Ain’t L’il George comin’ up here fo’
dinner?”
“He might git here in time, an’ he might not,” said
Chicken George. “He too lazy to finish what I give ’im to do
firs’ thing dis mornin’, an’ I tol’ ’im I don’t want to see his
face up here ’til he git it done!” Chicken George was
moving over to Uncle Pompey. “Sho’ glad to see you out’n
yo’ cabin, Uncle Pompey. How’s you doin’?”
“Po’ly, son, mighty po’ly. Ol’ man jes’ ain’t no mo’ good,
dat’s all.”
“Don’t give me dat stuff, nary bit!” boomed Chicken
George, and laughing, he turned to Tom, “Yo’ ol’ Uncle
Pompey one dem ol’ lizard kin’ o’ niggers gwine live to be
a hunnud! Done got real low sick reckon two, three times
since you been gone, but every time de wimminfolks all

snifflin’ ready to bury ’im, he git right back up ag’in!”
The three of them were laughing when the voice of
Gran’mammy Kizzy shrilled at them, “Y’all bring Pompey on
over here to de table now!” Though the day was crisp, the
women had set up a long table under the chinquapin tree
so that everybody could enjoy their Thanksgiving dinner
together.
James and Lewis seized Uncle Pompey’s chair, with
Sister Sarah running up solicitously behind them.
“Don’ drop ’im, now, he still ain’t too ol’ to fan y’all’s
britches!” called Chicken George.
When they were all seated, though Chicken George was
at the head of the table, it was pointedly to Tom that Matilda
said, “Son, grace de table.” The startled Tom wished he
had anticipated this, to have given advance thought to
some prayer that would express the emotions he was
feeling about the warmth and strength of a family. But with
everyone’s head already bowed, all he could think of now
was, “O Lawd, bless dis food we’s ’bout to eat, we ax in de
name de Father, de Son, an’ de Holy Ghos’. Amen.”
“Amen! ... Amen!” others echoed up and down the table.
Then Matilda, Gran’mammy Kizzy, and Sister Sarah began
shuttling back and forth, setting heaped and steaming
bowls and platters at intervals along the table, and urging all
to help themselves, before they also finally sat back down.
For several minutes not a word was spoken as everyone
ate as if they were starving, with appreciative grunts and
smacking noises. Then, after a while, with either Matilda or
Kizzy refilling his glass with fresh buttermilk or putting more
hot meat, vegetables, and cornbread on his plate, they
began plying Tom with questions.
“Po’ thing, is dey feedin’ you any good over yonder? Who
cook fo’ you anyhow?” asked Matilda.
Tom chewed his mouthful enough to reply, “Mr. Isaiah’s
wife, Miss Emma.”
“What color she is, what she look like?” asked Kizzy.
“She black, sorta fat.”
“Dat ain’t got nothin’ to do wid ’er cookin’!” guffawed
Chicken George. “She cook any good, boy?”

“Pretty fair, Pappy, yassuh,” Tom nodded affirmatively.
“Well, ain’t like yo’ own mammy’s nohow!” snapped
Sister Sarah. Tom murmured agreeably, “No’m,” thinking
how indignant Miss Emma would have been to hear them,
and how indignant they’d be to know that she was a better
cook.
“Her an’ dat blacksmith man, is dey good Christian
folks?”
“Yes’m, dey is,” he said. “’specially Miss Emma, she
read de Bible a whole lots.”
Tom was just finishing his third plateful when his mammy
and gran’mammy descended on him with still more,
despite his vigorous headshaking. He managed a muffled
protest: “Save sump’n for L’il George when he come!”
“Plenty lef for ’im an’ you knows it!” said Matilda.
“Have’nother piece dis fried rabbit ... l’il mo’ dese collard
greens ... an’ dis stewed winter squash. An’ Malizy done
sent down a great big sweet ’tater custard from de dinner
she servin’ in de big house. Y’all knows how good dat is—”
Tom had started forking into the custard when Uncle
Pompey cleared his throat to speak, and everyone hushed
up to hear him. “Boy, is you shoein’ mules an’ hosses yet?”
“Dey lets me pull off de ol’ shoes, but I ain’t put none on
yet,” said Tom, thinking how only the previous day it had
been necessary to hobble a vicious mule before it could be
shod. Loudly Chicken George hooted, “’speck he ain’t got
’nough good hard mule kicks yet to be broke in good!
Mighty easy to mess up hosses’ foots less’n somebody
know what he doin’! Heared ’bout one blacksmith nigger
put de shoes on backwards, an’ dat hoss wouldn’t do
nothin’ but back up!” When he quit laughing at his own joke,
Chicken George asked, “How much y’all git for shoein’
hosses an’ mules?”
“B’lieves de mens pays Massa Askew fo’teen cents a
shoe,” said Tom.
“Sho’ ain’t no money in it like fightin’ chickens!” Chicken
George exclaimed.
“Well, it’s sho’ plenty mo’ use o’ blacksmithin’ dan it is
dem chickens!” snapped Gran’mammy Kizzy, her tone so

cutting that Tom wanted to jump up and hug her. Then she
went on, her voice suddenly tender, “Son, what de man
have you doin’ in learnin’ you how to blacksmith?”
Tom was glad she asked, for he wanted to share with his
family some idea of what he was doing. “Well,
Gran’mammy, early every mornin’ I has de forge fire goin’
good by time Mr. Isaiah gits dere. Den I lays out de tools I
knows he gwine need for de jobs he gwine be doin’.
’Cause when you shapin’ red-hot iron, can’t let it be coolin’
down while you hunts for de right hammers to hit it wid—”
“Lawd, de chile blacksmithin’ already!” exclaimed Sister
Sarah.
“No’m,” said Tom. “I be’s what dey calls a ‘striker.’ If Mr.
Isaiah makin’ sump’n heavy, like wagon axles or
plowshares, den I hits wid de sledge wherever he tap his
hammer. An’ sometime l’il simple jobs he’ll let me finish
while he start sump’n else.”
“When he gwine let you start shoein’ de hosses?” asked
Chicken George, still pushing, seeming almost as if he
wanted to embarrass his blacksmithing son, but Tom
grinned. “Dunno, Pappy, but I reckon soon’s he feel like I
kin do it widout ’is he’p. Jes’ like you said, I sho’ has got
kicked aplenty times. Fact, some dem bad ones git to rarin’
up, dey won’t only kick, dey’ll bite a plug out’n you if you
ain’t careful.”
“Do white folks come roun’ dat blacksmith shop, son?”
asked Sister Sarah.
“Yes, ma’am, whole lots of ’em. Ain’t hardly no day don’t
see leas’ a dozen or mo’ standin’ roun’ talkin’ while dey’s
waiting for Mr. Isaiah to finish whatever work dey done
brung.”
“Well, den what kind o’ news is you done heared ’em
talkin’’bout dat maybe we ain’t, bein’ stuck off like we is
here?”
Tom thought a moment, trying to remember what had Mr.
Isaiah and Miss Emma felt were the most important things
they’d recently heard white people talking about. “Well, one
thing was sump’n dey calls ‘telegraph.’ It was some Massa
Morse in Washington, D.C., dat talked to somebody clear

in Baltimore. Dey say he say, ‘What have God wrought?’
But I ain’t never got de straight of what it s’posed to mean.”
Every head around the dinner table turned toward
Matilda as their Bible expert, but she seemed perplexed. “I
—well, I can’t be sho’,” she said uncertainly, “but b’lieve I
ain’t never read nothin’’bout dat in de Bible.”
“Somehow or ’nother, Mammy,” said Tom, “seem like it
weren’t to do wid de Bible. Was jes’ sump’n talked a long
ways through de air.”
He asked then if any of them were aware that a few
months before, President Polk had died of diarrhea in
Nashville, Tennessee, and had been succeeded by
President Zachary Taylor.
“Everybody know dat!” exclaimed Chicken George.
“Well, you know so much, you ain’t never told it in my
hearin’,” said Sister Sarah sharply.
Tom said, “White folks, ’specially dey young’uns, is been
comin’ roun’ singing songs s’posed to soun’ like us, but dey
was writ by a Massa Stephen Foster.” Tom sang the little
that he could remember of “Ol’ Black Joe,” “My Ol’
Kentucky Home,” and “Massa’s in de Col’, Col’ Ground.”
“Sho’ do soun’ sump’n like niggers!” Gran’mammy Kizzy
exclaimed.
“Mr. Isaiah say dat Massa Foster growed up spendin’ a
lotta time lissenin’ to nigger singin’ in churches an’ roun’ de
steamboats an’ wharves,” said Tom.
“Dat ’splain it!” said Matilda. “But ain’t you heared of no
doin’s by none o’ us?”
“Well, yas’m,” said Tom, and he said that free blacks who
brought work to Mr. Isaiah had been talking a lot about
famous northern blacks who were fighting against slavery,
traveling around, lecturing large mixed audiences to tears
and cheers by telling their life stories as slaves before they
had escaped to freedom. “Like it’s one name Frederick
Douglass,” Tom said. “Dey says he was raised a slave boy
in Maryland, an’ he teached hisself to read an’ write an’
finally worked an’ saved up enough to buy hisself free from
his massa.” Matilda cast a meaningful glance at Chicken
George as Tom went on. “Dey says people gathers by de

hunnuds anywhere he speak, an’ he done writ a book an’
even started up a newspaper.
“It’s famous womens, too, Mammy.” Tom looked at
Matilda, Gran’mammy Kizzy, and Sister Sarah, and he told
them of a former slave named Sojourner Truth, said to be
over six feet tall, who also lectured before huge crowds of
white and black people, though she could neither read nor
write.
Springing up from her seat, Gran’mammy Kizzy began
wildly gesturing. “Sees right now I needs to git up Nawth an’
do me some talking’.” She mimicked as if she were facing
a big audience, “Y’all white folks listen here to Kizzy! Ain’t
gwine have dis mess no mo’! Us niggers sick an’ tired
o’slavin’!”
“Mammy, de boy say dat woman six feet! You ain’t tall
enough!” Chicken George said, roaring with laughter, as
the others around the table glared at him in mock
indignation. Chagrined, Gran’mammy Kizzy sat back down.
Tom told them of another famous escaped slavewoman.
“She named Harriet Tubman. Ain’t no tellin’ how many
times she come back South an’ led out different whole
bunches o’ folks like us to freedom up Nawth on sump’n
deys callin’ de ‘Unnergroun’ Railroad.’ Fac’, she done it so
much dey claims by now white folks got out forty thousand
dollars’ worth o’ rewards fo’ her, alive or dead.”
“Lawd have mercy, wouldn’t o’ thought white folks pay dat
much to catch no nigger in de worl’!” said Sister Sarah.
He told them that in a far-distant state called California,
two white men were said to have been building a sawmill
when they discovered an unbelievable wealth of gold in the
ground, and thousands of people were said to be rushing in
wagons, on mules, even afoot to reach the place where it
was claimed that gold could be dug up by the shovelful.
He said finally that in the North great debates on the
subject of slavery were being held between two white men
named Stephen Douglas and Abraham Lincoln.
“Which one ’em for de niggers?” asked Gran’mammy
Kizzy.
“Well, soun’ like de Massa Lincoln, leas’ways de bes’ I

can tell,” said Tom.
“Well, praise de Lawd an’ give ’im stren’th!” said Kizzy.
Sucking his teeth, Chicken George got up patting his
ample belly and turned to Tom. “Looka here, boy, why’n’t
you’n me stretch our legs, walk off some dat meal?”
“Yassuh, Pappy,” Tom almost stammered, scarcely able
to conceal his amazement and trying to act casual.
The women, who were no less startled, exchanged
quizzical, significant glances when Chicken George and
Tom set off together down the road. Sister Sarah
exclaimed softly, “Lawd, y’all realize dat boy done growed
nigh big as his daddy!” James and Lewis stared after their
father and older brother nearly sick with envy, but they knew
better than to invite themselves along. But the two younger
girls, L’il Kizzy and Mary, couldn’t resist leaping up and
happily starting to hop-skip along eight or ten steps behind
them.
Without even looking back at them, Chicken George
ordered, “Git on back yonder an’ he’p y’all’s mammy wid
dem dishes!”
“Aw, Pappy!” they whined in unison.
“Git, done tol’ you!”
Half turning around with his eyes loving his little sisters,
Tom chided them gently, “Ain’t y’all hear Pappy? We see
you later on.”
With the girls’ complaining sounds behind them, they
walked on in silence for a little way and Chicken George
spoke almost gruffly, “Looka here, reckon you know I ain’t
meant no harm jes’ teasin’ you a l’il at dinner.”
“Aw, nawsuh,” Tom said, privately astounded at what
amounted to an apology from his father. “I knowed you was
jes’ teasin’.”
Grunting, Chicken George said, “What say we head on
down an’ look in on dem chickens? See what keepin’ dat
no-count L’il George down dere so long. All I knows, he
mighta cooked an’ et up some dem chickens fo’ his
Thanksgivin’ by now.”
Tom laughed. “L’il George mean well, Pappy. He jes’ a
l’il slow. He done tol’ me he jes’ don’ love dem birds like

you does.” Tom paused, then decided to venture his
accompanying thought. “I’speck nobody in de worl’ loves
dem birds like you does.”
But Chicken George agreed readily enough. “Nobody in
dis family, anyways. I done tried ’em all—’ceptin’ you.
Seem like all de res’ my boys willin’ to spend dey lives
draggin’ from one end of a fiel’ to de other, lookin’ up a
mule’s butt!” He considered for a moment. “Yo’
blacksmithin’, wouldn’t ’zackly call dat no high livin’ neither
—nothin’ like gamecockin’—but leas’ways it’s a man’s
work.”
Tom wondered if his father ever seriously respected
anything excepting fighting chickens. He felt deeply grateful
that somehow he had escaped into the solid, stable trade
of blacksmithing. But he expressed his thoughts in an
oblique way. “Don’t see nothin’ wrong wid farmin’, Pappy. If
some folks wasn’t farmin’, ’speck nobody wouldn’ be eatin’.
I jes’ took to blacksmithin’ same as you wid gamecockin’,
’cause I loves it, an’ de Lawd gimme a knack fo’ it. Jes’
ever’body don’ love de same things.”
“Well leas’ you an’ me got sense to make money doin’
what we likes,” said Chicken George.
Tom replied, “You does, anyway. I won’t make no money
fo’ couple mo’ years, ’til I’se finished ’prenticin’ an’ goes to
work for massa—dat is, if he gimme some de money, like
he do o’ what you wins hackfightin’!”
“Sho’ he will!” said Chicken George. “Massa ain’t bad as
yo’ mammy an’ gran’mammy an’ dem likes to claim. He got
’is ornery ways, sho’ is! You jes’ have to learn how to git to
massa’s good side, like I does—keep ’im b’leevin’ you
considers ’im one dem high-class massas what do good
by dey niggers.” Chicken George paused. “Dat Massa
Askew whose place you over dere workin’ on—you got any
idea what ’mount o’ money he give dat Isaiah nigger fo’ his
blacksmithin’?”
“I b’leeves dollar a week,” said Tom. “I’se heared Mr.
Isaiah’s wife say dat’s what he give her every week to save,
an’ she do, every penny.”
“Less’n a minute win mo’n dat fightin’ chickens!” Chicken

George exclaimed, and then contained himself.
“Well, anyhow, you jes’ leave de money part to me when
you comes back here to blacksmith fo’ massa. I talk to ’im
good ’bout how cheap dat Massa Askew is wid ’is nigger.”
“Yassuh.”
Chicken George was experiencing a peculiar feeling that
he really wished to insure having the alliance, even the
approval of this particular one among his six sons—not that
anything was wrong with the other five, and despite the fact
that this one was by far the least likely ever to sport anything
like a green scarf and black derby with a long feather in it; it
was just that very clearly this Tom possessed qualities of
responsibleness not encountered every day, as well as an
unusual individual durability and strength.
They had walked on in silence for a while when Chicken
George said abruptly, “You ever think ’bout blacksmithin’ fo’
yo’self, boy?”
“What you mean? How in de worl’ I gwine do dat,
Pappy?”
“You ever think ’bout savin’ de money you gwine be
makin’ an’ buyin’ yo’self free?”
Seeing Tom too thunderstruck to reply, Chicken George
kept talking.
“Few years back, roun’ when L’il Kizzy born, one night
me an’ yo’ mammy set down an figgered ’bout how much it
cost to buy us whole family free, ’cordin’ to prices fo’
niggers dem days. Come to roun’ sixty-eight hunnud dollars
—”
“Whew!” Tom was shaking his head.
“Hear me out!” George said. “Sho’ it’s a lot! But ever
since den, I been hackfightin’ my butt off, wid yo’ mammy
savin’ my share o’ de winnins. Ain’t winned as much as I’d
figured when I started out, but all de same don’ nobody
know but yo’ mammy an’ me—an’ now you—she got mo’n
a thousan’ dollars buried in jars roun’ de backyard!”
Chicken George looked at Tom. “Boy, I’se jes’ thinkin’ ... ”
“Me, too, Pappy!” A gleam was in Tom’s eyes.
“Lissen here, boy!” The urgency increased in Chicken
George’s tone. “If ’n I keeps winnin’ ’bout de same as in de

past few seasons, I oughta have three, fo’ hunnud mo’
stashed away time you starts blacksmithin’ fo’ massa.”
Tom was eagerly nodding his head. “An’, Pappy, wid
bofe us makin’ money, mammy could bury maybe five, six
hunnud a year!” he said excitedly.
“Yeah!” Chicken George exclaimed. “An’ dat rate, less’n
nigger prices is riz a lot higher, we ought to have ’nough to
buy us whole fam’ly free inside o’—lemme see now ... ”
They both figured, using their fingers. After a while, Tom
exclaimed, “’Bout fifteen years!”
“Where you learn to count so fas’? What you think ’bout
my idea, boy?”
“Pappy, gwine blacksmith my head off! I jes’ wish you’d
o’ said somethin’ fo’ now.”
“Wid two us, I knows we can do it!” said George,
beaming. “Make dis family ’mount to sump’n! Us all git up
Nawth, raisin’ chilluns an’ gran’chilluns free, like folks was
meant to! What you say, boy?”
Both deeply moved, Tom and Chicken George had
impulsively grasped each other about the shoulders when
just then they turned to see the stout, pudgy figure of L’il
George approaching at a lumbering trot, shouting “Tom!
Tom!” and wearing a grin seeming almost as wide as
himself. Reaching them breathless, his chest heaving, he
grabbed and pumped Tom’s hands, clapped him on the
back, and stood there alternately wheezing and grinning,
with sweat making his plump cheeks shine. “Glad ... to ...
see ... you ... Tom!” he gasped finally.
“Take it easy dere, boy!” said Chicken George. “You
won’t have strength to git to yo’ dinner.”
“Never ... too ... tired ... fo’ ... dat ... Pappy!”
“Whyn’t you git on up dere an’ eat, den,” said Tom, “an’
we jine you by and by. Pappy and me got things to talk
’bout.”
“Awright ... I ... see ... y’all ... later,” said L’il George,
needing no further encouragement as he turned to head for
slave row.
“Better hurry!” Chicken George shouted after him. “Don’
know how long yo’ mammy can hol’ off yo’ brothers from

eatin’ up what’s lef’!”
Watching L’il George break into a waddling run, Tom and
his father stood holding their sides from laughter until he
disappeared around the bend, still gaining momentum.
“We better figger sixteen years fo’ we gits free,” Chicken
George gasped.
“How come?” asked Tom, quickly concerned.
“Way dat boy eat, gwine cost a year’s pay jes’ keepin’
’im fed’til den!”

CHAPTER 103
In the memory of Chicken George, nothing had ever
generated such excitement among North Carolina
gamecockers as the news that spread swiftly during late
November of 1855 that the wealthy Massa Jewett was
entertaining as his house guest a titled, equally rich
gamecocker from England who had brought with him
across the ocean thirty of his purebred “Old English Game”
birds, said to be the finest breed of fighting cocks in
existence. According to the news, the Englishman, Sir C.
Eric Russell, had accepted Massa Jewett’s written
invitation to pit his birds against some of the best in the
United States. Since as longtime friends, they preferred not
to fight their gamecocks against one another, each of them
would supply twenty birds to fight any forty challenger birds
whose collective owners would be expected to ante up their
half of a $30,000 main pot, and $250 side bets would be
the minimum permitted on each cockfight. Another wealthy
local gamecocker volunteered to organize the forty
competitors—accepting only five birds apiece from seven
other owners besides himself.
It had not been really necessary for Massa Lea to tell his
veteran trainer that he was going after a share of such a
huge pot.
“Well,” he said upon return to the plantation after posting
his $1,875 bond, “we’ve got six weeks to train five birds.”
“Yassuh, ought to be able to do dat, I reckon,” Chicken
George replied, trying as hard—and as unsuccessfully—not
to seem excited. Apart from his own deep thrill just to think
of such a contest, Chicken George exulted to the
assembled slave-row family that it seemed to him that
sheer excitement had rolled twenty-five years off Massa
Lea. “Dey’s sho’ pricin’ out any hackfighters!” he
exclaimed. “Massa say it’s sho’ de bigges’ money fight he
ever got anywheres near to—fac’, de secon’ bigges’ he
ever even heared of!”

“Phew! What bigger fight was dat?” exclaimed Uncle
Pompey.
Chicken George said, “Reckon maybe twenty years back
dis double-rich Massa Nicholas Arrington what live near
Nashville, Tennessee, took ’leben covered wagons, twentytwo mens, and three hunnud birds clear crost no tellin’ how
many states, through bandits an’ Indians an’ everythin’, ’til
dey got to Mexico. Dey fought ’gainst ’nother three hunnud
birds belongin’ to de Pres’dent o’ Mexico, a Gen’l Santa
Ana, what had so much money he couldn’ even count it, an’
swo’ he raised de world’s greatest gamecocks. Well,
Massa say de fightin’ jes’ dem two men’s birds went on a
solid week! De stake was so big dey main purse was a
chest apiece full o’ money! Massa say even dey side bets
could o’ broke mos’ rich mens. In de end, dis Tennessee
Massa Arrington won roun’ half a million dollars! His birds
he called ‘Cripple Tonys’ after his crippled nigger trainer
named Tony. An’ dat Mexican Gen’l Santa Ana wanted one
dem ‘Cripple Tonys’ so bad fo’ a breedin’ cock he paid its
weight in gol’!”
“I see right now I better git in de chicken business,” said
Uncle Pompey.
For most of the next six weeks, Chicken George and
Massa Lea were seldom seen by anyone else on the
plantation. “It’s a good thing massa keepin’ off down dere
wid dem chickens, mad as ol’ missis is!” Miss Malizy told
the others on slave row at the end of the third week. “I heard
her jes’ screechin’ at him ’bout takin’ five thousan’ dollars
out’n de bank. Heared her say it near ’bout half what dey
got saved up from all dey lives, an’ she jes’ hollered an’
carried on ’bout ’im tryin’ to keep up wid dem real rich
massas what got a thousan’ times mo’ money dan he is.”
After shouting at the missis to shut up and mind her own
damn business, the massa had stalked out of the house,
said Miss Malizy.
Listening grimly, but saying nothing, were Matilda and
twenty-two-year-old Tom, who four years before had
returned to the plantation and built a blacksmith shop
behind the barn, where by now he was serving a thriving

trade of customers for Massa Lea. Fit to burst with anger,
Matilda had confided to her son how Chicken George had
furiously demanded and gotten their own two-thousanddollar cache of savings, which he was going to turn over to
the massa to be bet on the Lea birds. Matilda, too, had
screeched and wept in desperate effort to reason with
Chicken George, “but he act like he gone crazy!” she had
told Tom. “Hollered at me, ‘Woman, I knows every bird we
got from when dey was eggs. Three or fo’ ain’t nothin’ wid
wings can beat! Ain’t ’bout to pass up dis chance to zackly,
double what we got saved no quicker’n it take one our
chickens to kill another’n! Two minutes can save us eight,
nine mo’ years o’ scrapin’ an’ savin’ to buy us free!’”
“Mammy, I know you tol’ Pappy de savin’ have to start
over ag’in if de chicken lose!” Tom had exclaimed.
“Ain’t only tol’ ’im dat! Tried my bes’ to press on ’im he
ain’t got no right to gamble wid our freedom! But he got real
mad, hollerin’, ‘Ain’t no way we kin lose! You gimme my
money, woman!’” And Matilda had done so, she had told
Tom, her face stricken.
In the gamefowl area, Chicken George and Massa Lea
finished culling seventeen of the best rangewalk birds down
to ten of the finest gamecocks either of them had ever
seen. Then they began air-training those ten birds, tossing
them higher and higher, until finally eight of them flew as
much as a dozen yards before their feet touched the
ground. “I ’clare look like we’s trainin’ wil’ turkeys, Massa!”
chortled Chicken George.
“They’re going to need to be hawks up against Jewett’s
and that Englishman’s birds,” said the massa.
When the great cockfight was but a week away, the
massa rode off, and late the following day he returned with
six pairs of the finest obtainable Swedish steel gaffs, their
lengths as sharp as razors tapering to needle points.
After a final critical appraisal two days before the fight,
each of the eight birds seemed so perfect that there was
simply no way to say which five were best. So the massa
decided to take all eight and choose among them at the
last minute.

He told Chicken George that they would leave the
following midnight in order to arrive early enough for both
the gamecocks and themselves to rest from the long ride
and be fresh for the big fights. Chicken George knew that
the massa was itching as bad as he was just to get there.
The long ride through the darkness was uneventful. As he
drove, his gaze idly upon the lantern glowing and bobbing
at the end of the wagon’s tongue between the two mules,
Chicken George thought with mingled feelings of his and
Matilda’s recent emotional altercation about the money. He
told himself resentfully that he knew better than she did how
many years of patient saving it represented; after all, hadn’t
it been his own perennial scores upon scores of hackfights
that had earned it? He’d never feel for a moment that
Matilda wasn’t as good as wives came, so he regretted
he’d had to shout her down, upsetting her so badly, as
apparently the massa had also been forced to do within the
big house, but on the other hand there were those times
when the head of a family simply had to make the
important, hard decisions. He again heard Matilda’s tearful
cry, “George, you ain’t got no right to gamble wid all our
freedom!” How quickly she’d forgotten that it had been he in
the first place who had introduced the idea of accumulating
enough to buy their freedom. And after all those slow years
of saving, it was now nothing but a godsend that the massa
had confided that he needed more cash for side betting
during the forthcoming fights, not only to make a good
showing before those snobby, rich massas, but to win their
money as well. Chicken George grinned to himself,
remembering with relish Massa Lea’s utterly astounded
expression at hearing him say, “I got ’bout two thousand
dollars saved dat you can use to bet wid, Massa.” Upon
recovering from his shock, Massa Lea had actually
grabbed and shook his trainer’s hand, pledging his word
that Chicken George would receive every cent that was
won in bets using his money, declaring, “You ought to
double it, anyhow!” The massa hesitated. “Boy, what you
gonna do with four thousand dollars?”
In that instant Chicken George had decided to take an

even bigger gamble—to reveal why he had been saving so
long and so hard, “Massa, don’t mistake me none, ain’t got
nothin’ but de bes’ kin’ o’ feelin’s ’bout you, Massa. But me
an’ ’Tilda jes’ got to talkin’, an’ Massa we jes’ ’cided we
gwine try see couldn’ us buy us an’ our chilluns from you,
an’ spen’ out de res’ our days free!” Seeing Massa Lea
clearly taken aback, Chicken George again implored,
“Please Lawd don’t take us wrong, Massa—”
But then in one of Chicken George’s most richly warming
life experiences, Massa Lea had said, “Boy, I’m gonna tell
you what’s been on my mind about this chickenfight we’re
going into. I’m figuring for it to be my last big one. Don’t
think you even realize, I’m seventy-eight years old. I’ve been
over fifty years of dragging back and forth every season
worrying with raising and fighting these chickens. I’m sick of
it. You hear me! I tell you what, boy! With my cut of that main
pot and side bets, I’m figgerin’ to win enough to build me
and my wife another house—not no great big mansion like I
wanted one time, but just five, six rooms, new, that’s all we
need. And I hadn’t thought about it until you just brought it
up, but then won’t be no more point in owning a whole
passel of y’all niggers to have to fend for. Just Sarah and
Malizy could cook and keep a good garden we can live off,
and have enough money in the bank not to never have to
beg nobody for nothin’—”
Chicken George was barely breathing as Massa Lea
went on. “So I’m gonna tell you what, boy! Y’all have served
me well an’ ain’t never give me no real trouble. We win this
chickenfight big, at least double both our money, yeah, you
just give me what you’ll have, four thousand dollars, and
we’ll call it square! And you know good as I do all y’all
niggers are worth twice that! Fact, I never told you, but once
that rich Jewett offered me four thousand just for you, an’ I
turned him down! Yeah, an’ y’all can go on free if that’s what
you want!”
Suddenly in tears, Chicken George had lunged to
embrace Massa Lea, who quickly moved aside in
embarrassment. “Oh Lawdy, Massa, you don’ know what
you’s sayin’! Us wants to be free so bad!” Massa Lea’s

reply was strangely hoarse. “Well, I don’t know what y’all
niggers’ll do, free, without somebody lookin’ out for you. An’
I know my wife’s going to raise all manners of hell about me
just the same as giving y’all away. Hell, that blacksmith boy
Tom alone is worth a good twenty-five hundred plus he’s
making me good money to boot!”
Roughly the massa had shoved Chicken George. “Git,
nigger, before I change my mind! Hell! I must be crazy! But I
hope your woman an’ mammy and the rest y’all niggers find
out I ain’t bad as I know they always make me out to be!”
“Aw nawsuh, nawsuh, Massa, thank you, Massa!”
Chicken George went scrambling backward, as Massa
Lea hastily departed up the road toward the big house.
Chicken George wished now more than ever that the
bitter encounter with Matilda had never occurred. Now he
decided it best to keep his triumphant secret, to let Matilda,
his mammy Kizzy, and the whole family learn of their
freedom as an absolutely total surprise. Still, fit to burst with
such a secret, several times he nearly told Tom, but then
always at the last moment he didn’t, for even as solid a man
as Tom was, he was so close with both his mammy and
gran’mammy that he might swear them to secrecy, which
would ruin it. Also that would activate among them the very
sticky issue that according to what the massa had said,
Sister Sarah, Miss Malizy, and Uncle Pompey were going
to have to be left behind, though they were as much family
as anybody else.
So across the interim weeks, Chicken George, pent up
with his secret, had submerged himself body and soul into
honing into absolute perfection the final eight gamecocks
that now were riding quietly in their coops behind him and
Massa Lea in the big custom-built wagon rolling along the
lonely road through the dark. At intervals Chicken George
wondered what the uncommonly silent Massa Lea was
thinking.
It was in the early daylight when they caught sight of the
vast and motley throng that even this early had not only
overrun the cockfighting area but had also spilled into an
adjoining pasture that was quickly filling with other wagons,

carriages, buggies, carts, and snorting mules and horses.
“Tawm Lea! ” A group of poor crackers cried out upon
seeing the massa climb down from his huge wagon. “Go git
’em, Tawm!” As he adjusted his black derby, Chicken
George saw the massa nodding at them in a friendly
manner, but he kept on walking. He knew that the massa
wavered between pride and embarrassment at his
notoriety among the crackers. After half a century as a
gamecocker in fact, Massa Lea was a legend wherever
chickens were fought locally, since even at his age of
seventy-eight, his ability to handle birds in a cockpit
seemed undiminished.
Chicken George had never heard such a din of crowing
gamecocks as he began unpacking things for action. A
passing slave trainer stopped and told him that among the
crowd were many who had traveled for days from other
states, even as distant as Florida. Glancing about as they
talked, Chicken George saw that the usual spectator area
was more than doubled, but already was crawling with men
guaranteeing themselves a seat. Among those moving
steadily past the wagon, he saw as many strange faces
both white and black as he did familiar ones, and he felt
pride when numerous among both races obviously
recognized him, usually nudging their companions and
whispering.
The sprawling crowd’s buzzing excitement rose to a yet
higher pitch when three judges came to the cockpit and
began measuring and marking the starting lines. Another
buzz arose when someone’s gamecock fluttered loose and
went furiously attacking men in its path, even sending a dog
yelping, until the bird was cornered and caught. And the
crowd’s noises swelled with each arrival and identification
of any of the area’s well-known gamecockers—especially
the rest of the eight who would be competing against the
sponsoring Massas Jewett and Russell.
“I ain’t never seed no Englishman, is you?” Chicken
George overheard one poor white man ask another, who
said he hadn’t either. He also heard talk about the titled
Englishman’s wealth, that he had not only a huge English

estate, but also rich holdings in places called Scotland,
Ireland, and Jamaica. And he heard that Massa Jewett had
proudly boasted among friends of how his guest was
known for fighting his birds anytime, anywhere, against any
competition, for any amount.
Chicken George was chopping a few apples into small
bits to feed the birds when suddenly the crowd noise rose
to a roar—and standing up quickly in the wagon he
recognized the approaching canopied surrey driven by
Massa Jewett’s always poker-faced black coachman. In the
back were the two rich massas, smiling and waving down
at the crowd, surging so thickly around them that the
carriage’s finely matched horses had a hard time
progressing. And not far behind came six wagons, each
filled with tall cock coops, the lead wagon driven by Massa
Jewett’s white trainer, alongside of whom sat a thin and
keen-nosed white man whom Chicken George overheard
someone nearby exclaim that the titled, wealthy Englishman
had brought clear across the ocean just to care for his
birds.
But the oddly dressed, short, stockily built, and ruddycomplexioned English nobleman himself was the milling
crowd’s major focus of attention as he rode alongside
Massa Jewett in the surrey, both of them looking every inch
the important, even lordly men they were, the Englishman
seeming to display just an extra touch of disdain and
hauteur toward the jostling throng on the ground.
Chicken George had attended so many cockfights that
he turned to his work of massaging the legs and wings of
his birds, knowing out of experience that different sounds of
the crowd would tell him whatever was going on, without his
even looking. Soon a referee shouted for a quieting of the
hoots, catcalls, and rebel yells that said that many in the
crowd had already been hard at their bottles.
Then he heard the first announcement: “Mr. Fred Rudolph
of Williamstown is pitting his red bird against Sir C. Eric
Russell of England with his speckled gray.”
Then: “Bill your cocks!”
And then: “Pit!” And the crowd’s shouting, followed by a

sudden awed hush, told him as clearly as if he had been
watching that the fight had quickly been won by the
Englishman’s bird.
As each of the eight challengers in turn fought their string
of five birds alternately against one belonging either to
Massa Jewett or the Englishman, Chicken George had
never heard such a roar of side betting in his life, and the
battles within the pit were often matched by the verbal
contests between the crowd and the referees shouting for
quiet. Now and then the crowd noises would tell the busy
Chicken George that both birds had been hurt badly
enough for the referees to stop the fight to let the owners
doctor them up before the fight continued. George could tell
from a special roaring of the crowd each time one of the
wealthy men’s birds was beaten, which wasn’t often, and he
wondered nervously how soon Massa Lea’s turn was going
to come. George guessed that the judges must be picking
the order of challengers by plucking their names on slips
from a hat.
He would have loved to see at least some of the actual
fighting, but so much was at stake: He was not going to
interrupt his massaging, not even for one moment. He
thought fleetingly about what a fortune of money, some of it
his own years of savings, the massa was only waiting to bet
on the very birds whose muscles he was gently kneading
under his fingers. Although only some chosen five among
them would fight, there was no way to guess which five, so
every one of the eight had to be in the very ultimate of
physical readiness and condition. Chicken George had not
often prayed in his life, but now he did so. He tried to
picture what Matilda’s face was going to look like, first
when he returned and dropped into her apron their money
at least doubled, and next when he would ask her to
assemble the whole family, when he would announce they
were FREE.
Then he heard the shout of the referee: “The next five
challenging birds are owned and will be handled by Mr.
Tom Lea of Caswell County!”
George’s heart leaped up into his throat! Clapping his

derby tighter on his head, he sprang down from the wagon,
knowing the massa would be coming now to select his first
bird.
“Taaaaawm Lea! ” Above the crowd noise he heard the
name being squalled out by the poor crackers. Then came
advancing raucous rebel yells as a group of men surged
out of the crowd, surrounding the massa. Reaching the
wagon amid them, he cupped his hand over his mouth and
over the din shouted in George’s ear, “These fellas will help
us take ’em all over by the cockpit.”
“Yassuh, Massa.”
George went leaping back onto the wagon, handing
down the eight cock coops to the massa’s poor-white
companions, his thoughts flashing that in his thirty-seven
years of gamecocking he never had ceased to marvel at
Massa Lea’s appearance of a totally detached calm in
such tense times as now. Then they were all trooping back
toward the cockpit through the crowd, Massa Lea carrying
the splendid dark buff bird he had chosen to fight first, and
Chicken George bringing up the rear carrying his woven
basket of emergency injury medications, rabbit underbelly
fur, some leaves of fresh ivy, glycerin, a ball of spider’s
web, and turpentine. It was a worsening push-and-shove
progress the closer they got toward the cockpit, with the
alcoholic cries of “Tawm Lea!” ringing in their ears, as well
as sometimes “That’s his Chicken George nigger!” and
George could feel the eyes on him as if they were fingers,
and it felt good, but kept both moving and looking straight
ahead, trying to appear as cool as the massa.
And then Chicken George saw the short, squat, titled
Englishman standing casually near the cockpit, holding a
magnificent bird within the crook of his left arm, as his eyes
watchfully appraised the little procession of them arriving
with the challenger birds. After exchanging curt nods with
Massa Lea, Russell set his bird on the scales and the
referee sang out, “Five pounds and fifteen ounces!” The
beautiful bird’s silvery blue plumage reflected brilliantly in
the sunlight.
Then the massa stepped up with his dark buff bird, which

was one of Chicken George’s particular favorites. It was
powerful, savage, its neck jerking about like a rattlesnake,
murder in its eyes, and it was seething to be released.
When the referee shouted “Six pounds even!” the harddrinking poor-white fans started yelling as if the extra ounce
meant the fight was won already. “ Taaaaawm Lea! Go git
that Britisher, Tawm! Act like he mighty stuck up! Take ’im
down a peg!”
It was plain that Massa Lea’s special fans were really
well liquored, and Chicken George saw the darkening flush
of embarrassment on both the massa’s and the
Englishman’s faces as, pretending not to hear, they
kneeled to tie on their birds’ steel gaffs. But the cries grew
more loud and rude: “Them chickens or ducks he fightin?”
... “Naw, it’s swimmin’ chickens!” ... “Yeah! He feed ’em
fishes!” The Englishman’s face was angry. The referee had
begun dashing back and forth, furiously waving his arms,
shouting, “Gentlemen! Please!” But the derisive laughter
only spread and the wisecracks became more cutting:
“Where’s his red coat at?” ... “Do he fight foxes, too?” ...
“Naw, too slow, waddle like a possum!” ... “More like a
bullfrog!” ... “He look to me like a bloodhound!”
Massa Jewett strode out, angrily confronting the referee,
his hands hacking the air, but with his words drowned out
by the chanting chorus, “Tawmmm Lea! ” ... “Tawmmmmm
LEA!” Now even the judges joined the referee, dashing this
way and that, flailing their arms, brandishing their fists and
barking repeatedly, “The cockfight will stop unless there’s
quiet!” ... “Y’all want that, keep it up!” Slowly, the drunken
cries and laughter began subsiding. Chicken George saw
Massa Lea’s face sick with his embarrassment, and that
both the Englishman and Massa Jewett were absolutely
livid.
“Mr. Lea!” When the Englishman loudly and abruptly
snapped out the words, almost instantly the crowd fell silent.
“Mr. Lea, we both have such superb birds here, I wonder
if you’d care to join me in a special personal side bet?”
Chicken George knew that every man among the
hundreds present sensed just as he did the Englishman’s

tone of vengeful-ness and condescension behind his
manner of civility. The back of the massa’s neck, he saw,
had suddenly become flushed with his anger.
A few seconds brought Massa Lea’s stiff reply: “That will
suit me, sir. What is your proposition?”
The Englishman paused. He appeared to be pondering
the matter before he spoke. “Would ten thousand dollars be
sufficient?”
He let the wave of gasps sweep the crowd, and then,
“That is, unless you haven’t that much faith in your bird’s
chances, Mr. Lea.” He stood looking at the massa, his thin
smile clearly contemptuous.
The crowd’s brief exclamatory rumbling quickly faded
into a deathly stillness; those who had been seated were
standing up now. Chicken George’s heart seemed to have
stopped beating. Like a distant echo he heard Miss
Malizy’s report of Missis Lea’s fury that the five thousand
dollars the massa had withdrawn from the bank was “near
’bout half dey life savin’s.” So Chicken George knew
Massa Lea couldn’t dare to call that bet. But what possible
response could he make not to be utterly humiliated before
this throng including practically everyone he knew? Sharing
his massa’s agony, Chicken George couldn’t even bring
himself to look at him. An eternity seemed to pass, then
George doubted his ears.
Massa Lea’s voice was strained. “Sir, would you care to
double that? Twenty thousand!”
The whole crowd vented exclamations of incredulity amid
rustling agitated movements. In sheer horror Chicken
George realized that sum represented Massa Lea’s total
assets in the world, his home, his land, his slaves, plus
Chicken George’s savings. He saw the Englishman’s
expression of utter astonishment, before quickly he
collected himself, his face now set and grim. “A true
sportsman!” he exclaimed, extending his hand to Massa
Lea. “A bet, sir! Let us heel up our birds!”
Suddenly then Chicken George understood: Massa Lea
knew that his magnificent dark buff bird would win. Not only
would the massa become instantly rich, but this one crucial

victory would make him forever a heroic legend for all poor
crackers, a symbol that even the snobbish, rich blueblood
massas could be challenged and beaten! None of them
could ever again look down their noses at Tom Lea!
Massa Lea and the Englishman now bent down on their
opposite sides of the cockpit, and in that instant it seemed
to Chicken George that the entire life of the massa’s bird
flashed through his mind. Even as a cockerel, its
unbelievably quick reflexes at first had caught his attention;
then as a stag its amazing viciousness saw it constantly
trying to attack others through the cracks in their fence-row
pen; and when recently retrieved from the rangewalk, within
seconds it had nearly killed the old catchcock before it
could be stopped. The massa had picked that bird knowing
how smart, aggressive, and deep game it was. For just a
split second Chicken George seemed again to hear an
outraged Matilda, “You’s crazier even dan massa! Wors’
can happen to ’im is endin’ up jes’ a po’ cracker again, but
you’s gamblin’ yo’ whole fam’ly’s freedom on some
chicken!”
Then the three judges stepped out, positioning
themselves evenly around the cockpit. The referee poised
as if he stood on eggs. An atmosphere seemed to be
hovering that everyone there knew they were about to
witness something to talk about for the rest of their days.
Chicken George saw his massa and the Englishman
holding down their straining birds, both of their faces raised
to watch the referee’s lips.
“Pit!”
The silvery blue and dark buff birds blurred toward each
other, crashing violently and bouncing backward. Landing
on their feet, both were instantly again in the air, tearing to
reach each other’s vitals. Beaks snapping, spurs flashing
were moving at a blinding speed, attacking with ferocity
that Chicken George had seldom seen equaled by any two
birds in a cockpit. Suddenly the Englishman’s silvery blue
was hit, the massa’s bird had sunk a spur deeply into one
of its wing bones; they fell off balance, both struggling to
loosen the stuck spur while pecking viciously at each

other’s heads.
“Handle! Thirty seconds!” The referee’s shout was barely
uttered before both the Englishman and Massa Lea sprang
in; the spur freed, both men licked their birds’ disarrayed
head feathers to smoothness again, then set them back
down on their starting lines, this time holding them by the
tails. “Get ready.... Pit!”
Again the cocks met evenly high in midair, both sets of
spurs seeking a lethal strike, but failing to do so before they
dropped back to the ground. The massa’s bird dashed
trying to knock its enemy off balance, but the English bird
feinted brilliantly sidewise, drawing the crowd’s gasps as
the massa’s bird lunged harmlessly past at full force.
Before he whirled about, the English bird was upon him;
they rolled furiously on the ground, then regained their feet,
battling furiously beak to beak, parting, beating at each
other with powerful wing blows above a flurry of slashing
legs. Again they took to the air, dropping back again,
ground-fighting with new fury.
A cry rose! The English bird had drawn blood. A
spreading darkening area showed on the breast of the
massa’s bird. But he violently buffeted his enemy with wing
blows until it stumbled and he sprang above it for a kill. But
again the English bird brilliantly crouched, dodged,
escaped. Chicken George had never witnessed such
incredibly swift reflexes. But the massa’s bird now whirled
forcefully enough to knock the English bird onto its back. He
hit it twice in the chest, drawing blood, but the English bird
managed to flap into the air, and came down, striking the
massa’s bird in the neck.
Chicken George had quit breathing as the bleeding birds
sparred, circling, heads low, each seeking an opening. In a
sudden blinding flurry, the English bird was overpowering
the massa’s bird, battering with its wings, its striking spurs
drawing more blood, then incredibly the massa’s bird burst
into the air and as it came down sinking a spur into the
English bird’s heart; it collapsed in a feathery heap, its
beak gushing blood.
It came so swiftly that a second or so seemed to pass

before the huge din rose. Screaming, red-faced men were
springing up and down, “Tawm! Tawm! He done it!”
Chicken George, beyond happiness, saw them mobbing
the massa, pounding his back, pumping his hand. “Tawm
Lea! Tawm Lea! Tom LEA!”
We’s gwine be free, Chicken George kept thinking. The
actuality of soon telling his family seemed unbelievable,
inconceivable. He glimpsed the Englishman with his jaw set
in a way that made one think of a bulldog.
“Mr. LEA!” Probably nothing else could have so quickly
quieted the crowd.
The Englishman was walking, he stopped about three
yards distant from the massa. He said, “Your bird fought
brilliantly. Either one could have won it. They were the most
perfectly matched pair I’ve ever seen. I’m told you’re a kind
of sportsman who might care to let your winnings ride on
another contest between birds of ours.”
Massa Lea stood there, his face blanched.
For seconds cooped gamecocks’ cluckings and
crowings were the only sounds heard as thronged men
tried to comprehend the potential of two gamecocks
battling with eighty thousand dollars at stake, winner take
all....
Heads had swiveled toward Massa Lea. He seemed
bewildered, uncertain. For one split second his glance
brushed Chicken George, working feverishly on the injured
bird. Chicken George was as startled as others to hear his
own voice, “Yo’ birds whup anything wid feathers, Massa!”
The sea of white faces swiveled toward him.
“I’ve heard that your faithful darky is among the best
trainers, but I wouldn’t rely too much on his advice. I also
have other very good birds.”
The words had come as if the rich Englishman regarded
his previous loss about as he might have a game of
marbles, as if he were taunting Massa Lea.
Then Massa Lea sounded elaborately formal: “Yes, sir.
As you propose, I’ll take pleasure in letting the sum ride on
another fight.”
The next several minutes of preparatory activities passed

almost as a blur for Chicken George. Not a sound came
from the surrounding crowd. There had never been anything
like this. All of Chicken George’s instincts approved when
Massa Lea indicated with a forefinger the coop containing
the bird that Chicken George had previously given a
nickname. “De Hawk, yassuh,” he breathed, knowing
precisely that bird’s tendency for seizing and holding an
enemy with its beak while slashing with its spurs. It would
be the countermeasure for birds trained to feint expertly, as
the previous contest had suggested was characteristic
within the Englishman’s flock.
Cradling “De Hawk” in his arm, Massa Lea went out to
where the Englishman held a solid dark gray bird. The birds
weighed in at six pounds even.
When “Pit!” came, bringing the anticipated rushing
impact, somehow instead of either bird taking to the air,
they exchanged furious wing blows and Chicken George
could hear “De Hawk’s” beak snapping after a proper hold
... when somehow amid mutual buffeting an English spur
struck in savagely. The massa’s bird stumbled and its head
dropped limply for an instant before it collapsed, its opened
mouth streaming blood.
“O Lawd! O Lawd! O Lawd!” Chicken George went
bolting, knocking aside men in his lunge into the circular
cockpit. Bellowing like a baby, scooping up the obviously
mortally wounded “Hawk,” he sucked clotting blood from its
beak as it weakly fluttered, dying in his hands. He struggled
to his feet with the nearest men drawing back from his
bawling anguish as he stumbled back through the crowd
and toward the wagon cradling the dead bird.
Back about the pit a gathering of planters were wildly
back-slapping and congratulating the Englishman and
Massa Jewett. All of their backs were turned to the stricken,
solitary figure of Massa Lea, who stood rooted, staring
down with a glazed look at the bloodstains in the cockpit.
Turning finally, Sir C. Eric Russell walked over to where
Massa Lea was, and Massa Lea slowly raised his eyes.
“What’d you say?” he mumbled.
“I said, sir, it just wasn’t your lucky day.”

Massa Lea managed a trace of a smile.
Sir C. Eric Russell said, “Concerning the wager. Of
course, no one carries about such sums in his pocket. Why
don’t we settle up tomorrow? Say, sometime in the
afternoon—” He paused. “After the tea hour, at Mr. Jewett’s
home.”
Numbly, Massa Lea nodded. “Yes, sir.”
The trip home took two hours. Neither the massa nor
Chicken George spoke a word. It was the longest ride
Chicken George had ever taken. But it had not been long
enough, as the wagon pulled into the driveway ...
When Massa Lea returned from Massa Jewett’s during
the next day’s dusk, he found Chicken George mixing meal
for the cockerels in the supply hut, where he had spent most
of the hours since Matilda’s screams, wails, and shouting
during the previous night had finally driven him from their
cabin.
“George,” the massa said, “I got somethin’ hard to tell
you.” He paused, groping for words. “Don’t know how to
say it hardly. But you already know I ain’t had nowhere near
the money folks thinks I did. Fact is, ’cept for a few
thousand, ’bout all I own is the house, this land, and you few
niggers.”
He’s going to sell us, George sensed.
“Trouble is,” the massa went on, “even all that ain’t but
roun’ half what I owe that goddamned sonofabitch. But he’s
offered me a break—” The massa hesitated again. “You
heard him say what he’d heard about you. And he said
today he could see how good you train in both the birds
fought—”
The massa took a deep breath. George held his. “Well,
seems like he needs to replace a trainer he lost over in
England awhile back, and he thinks bringing back a nigger
trainer would be fun.” The massa couldn’t look into
George’s disbelieving eyes and became more abrupt. “Not
to drag out this mess, he’ll call us square for all I’ve got in
cash, a first and second mortgage on the house, and using
you over in England long enough to train somebody else.
He says no more’n a couple of years.”

The massa forced himself to look Chicken George in the
face. “Can’t tell you how bad I feel about this, George.... I
ain’t got no choice. He’s lettin’ me off light. If I don’t do it, I’m
ruint, everything I ever worked for.”
George couldn’t find words. What could he say? After all,
he was the massa’s slave.
“Now, I know you’re wiped out, too, and I mean to make it
up to you. So I pledge you my word right here and now
while you’re gone I’ll take care of your woman and
young’uns. And the day you get home—”
Massa Lea paused, sliding a hand into his pocket,
withdrawing it, and holding a folded paper that he unfolded
and thrust before Chicken George.
“Know what that is? Sat down an’ wrote it out last night.
You’re looking right at your legal freedom paper, boy! I’m
gonna keep it in my strongbox to hand you the day you
come back!”
But after momentarily staring at the mysterious writing
that covered most of the square, white sheet of paper,
Chicken George continued struggling to control his fury.
“Massa,” he said quietly, “I was gwine buy us all free! Now
all I had gone, an’ you sendin’ me off crost de water
somewheres ’way from my wife an’ chilluns besides. How
come you can’t leas’ free dem now, den me when I gits
back?”
Massa Lea’s eyes narrowed. “I don’t need you tellin’ me
what to do, boy! Ain’t my fault you lost that money! I’m
offerin’ to do too much for you anyhow, that’s the trouble
with niggers! You better be careful of your mouth!” The
massa’s face was reddening. “If it wasn’t for you bein’ all
your life here, I’d just go ahead an’ sell your ass!”
George looked at him, then shook his head. “If all my life
mean anythin’ to you, Massa, how come you’s jes’ messin’
it up mo’?”
The massa’s face set into hardness. “Pack whatever you
intend to take with you! You leave for England Saturday.”

CHAPTER 104
With Chicken George gone, his luck gone, and perhaps his
nerve gone as well, the fortunes of Massa Lea continued to
decline. At first, he ordered L’il George into full-time daily
care of the chickens, but toward the end of only a third day,
the massa found some of the cockerel pens’ waterpans
empty and the chubby, slow L’il George was sent fleeing
with dire threats. The youngest boy, Lewis, nineteen, was
next transferred from field work to take on the job. In
preparation for the season’s several remaining gamecocking matches, Massa Lea now was forced to take over
most of the prefight training and conditioning chores
himself, since Lewis as yet simply did not know how. He
accompanied the massa to the various local contests, and
each of those days, the rest of the family gathering in the
evenings awaited the return of Lewis to tell them whatever
had happened.
The massa’s birds had lost more fights than they won,
Lewis always said, and after a while that he had overheard
men openly talking that Tom Lea was trying to borrow
money to make bets. “Ain’t many seem like dey wants to
talk wid massa. Dey jes’ speaks or waves quick an’ keeps
goin’ like he got de plague.”
“Yeah, de plague o’ dem knowin’ now he po’,” said
Matilda. “Po’ cracker’s all he ever been!” Sister Sarah
snapped.
It became slave row’s common knowledge that Massa
Lea had taken to drinking heavily, almost every day,
between his shouting matches with Missis Lea.
“Dat ol’ man ain’t never been dis evil!” Miss Malizy told
her grimly listening audience one night. “He hit de house
actin’ jes’ like a snake, hollerin’ an’ cussin if’ n missy even
look at ’im. An’ all day long when he gone, she in dere cryin’
she don’t even never want to hear no more ’bout no
chickens!”
Matilda listened, emotionally drained from her own

weeping and praying since her Chicken George had been
gone. Briefly her glances reviewed their teen-aged
daughters and six strong grown sons, three of them now
with mates and children. Then her eyes came back to rest
upon her blacksmith son, Tom, as if she wished he would
say something. But who spoke instead was Lilly Sue,
Virgil’s pregnant mate, who was briefly visiting from the
nearby Curry plantation where she lived, and fear was thick
in her tone. “I don’ know y’all’s massa good as you do, but I
jes’ feels he gwine do somethin’ terrible, sho’s we born.” A
silence fell among them, no one being willing to express
their own guess, at least not aloud.
After the next morning’s breakfast, Miss Malizy waddled
hurriedly from the kitchen down to the blacksmith shop.
“Massa say tell you saddle his hoss and git it roun’ to de
front porch, Tom,” she urged, her large eyes visibly moist.
“Lawd, please hurry up, ’cause de things he been sayin’ to
po’ ol’ missis jes’ ain’t hardly fittin’.” Without a word Tom
soon tied the saddled horse to a gatepost, and he had just
started back around the side of the big house when Massa
Lea came lurching through the front door. Already redfaced from drinking, he struggled up onto the horse’s back
and galloped away, weaving in the saddle.
Through a half-opened window, Tom could overhear
Missis Lea weeping as if her heart would break. Feeling
embarrassment for her, he continued across the backyard
to the blacksmith shed where he was just starting to beat a
dulled plow point into sharpness when Miss Malizy came
again.
“Tom,” she said, “I ’clare seem like massa jes’ win’ up
killin’ hisself, he keep on like he goin’, man nigh onto eighty
years ol’.”
“You want to know the truth, Miss Malizy,” he replied, “I
b’lieve one way or ’nother dat’s what he tryin’ to do.”
Massa Lea returned during the midafternoon,
accompanied by another white man on horseback, and
from their respective kitchen and blacksmith shop
observation posts, both Miss Malizy and Tom saw with
surprise that the pair didn’t dismount and enter the big

house to freshen up and share a drink, as was always
previously done with any guests. Instead, the horses were
kept trotting on down the back road toward the gamecock
area. Not half an hour later, Tom and Miss Malizy saw the
visitor come back riding rapidly alone, holding under one
arm a frightened, clucking gamehen, and Tom being
outside was able to catch a fairly close glimpse of the
man’s furious expression as he rode by.
It was at that night’s usual slave-row gathering when
Lewis told what actually had happened. “When I heared de
hosses comin’,” he said, “I jes’ made sho’ massa seed me
workin’ fo’ I made myself scarce, over behin’ some bushes
where I knowed I could see an’ hear.
“Well, after some pretty hot bargainin’, dey come to a
hunnud-dollar’greement fo’ dis gamehen settin’ on a clutch
o’ eggs. An’ I seen de man count out de money, den massa
count it again fo’ puttin’ it in his pocket. Right after den a
misunderstandin’ commence’bout de man sayin’ de eggs
under de hen went wid de deal. Well, massa commence to
cussin’ like he crazy! He run, grab up de hen an’ wid his
foot stomped an’ squashed dat nest o’ eggs into one
mess! Dem two was nigh fightin’ when all o’ a sudden de
odder man snatched de hen an’ jumped on his hoss, yellin’
he’d bus’ massa’s head if he wasn’t so damn ol’!”
The uneasiness of the slave-row family deepened with
each passing day, and nights were spent in fitful sleep
resultant from worry of whatever might be the next frightful
development. Across that 1855 summer and into the fall,
with every angry outburst from the massa, with his every
departure or arrival, the rest of the family’s eyes involuntarily
would turn to the twenty-two-year-old blacksmith Tom, as if
appealing for his direction, but Tom offered none. By the
crisp November, when there had been a fine harvest from
the massa’s roughly sixty-five acres in cotton and tobacco,
which they knew he had been able to sell for a good price,
one Saturday dusk Matilda watched from her cabin window
until she saw Tom’s last blacksmithing customer leave, and
she hurried out there, her expression telling him from long
experience that something special was on her mind.

“Yas’m, Mammy?” he asked, starting to bank the fire in
his forge.
“I been thinkin’, Tom. All six you boys done growed up to
be mens now. You ain’t my oldes’, but I’se yo’ mammy an’
knows you’s got de levelest head,” Matilda said. “Plus dat,
you’s de blacksmith an’ dey’s fiel’ han’s. So look like you’s
got to be de main man o’ dis fam’ly since yo’ daddy gone
’bout eight months now—” Matilda hesitated, then added
loyally, “leas’ ways, ’til he git back.”
Tom was frankly startled, for ever since his boyhood he
had been his family’s most reserved member. Although he
and his brothers had all been born and reared on Massa
Lea’s plantation, he had never become very close with any
of them, principally because he had been away for years as
a blacksmithing apprentice, and since his return as a man,
he was at the blacksmith shed, while the rest of his brothers
were out in the fields. He had especially little contact
anymore with Virgil, Ashford, and L’il George, for differing
reasons. Virgil, now twenty-six, spent all his free time over
on the adjoining plantation with his wife Lilly Sue and their
recently born son, whom they had named Uriah. As for
Ashford, twenty-five, he and Tom had always disliked and
avoided each other, and Ashford had become more bitter
at the world than ever since a girl he desperately wanted to
marry had a massa who refused to let them jump the
broom, calling Ashford an “uppity nigger.” And the twentyfour-year-old L’il George, now just plain fat, was also deep
in courtship with an adjoining plantation’s cook, twice his
age, which evoked wry family comments that he would woo
anyone who would fill his stomach.
Matilda’s telling Tom that she saw him as the family
leader startled him the more since it implied his becoming
their intermediary with Massa Lea, with whom he
intentionally had very little actual contact. From when the
equipment had been bought to establish a blacksmith
shop, the massa somehow had always seemed to respect
Tom’s quiet reserve, along with his obvious competence at
blacksmithing, which brought in an increasing flow of
customers. They always paid the massa at the big house

for whatever jobs Tom had done, and each Sunday the
massa gave Tom two dollars for his week’s work.
Along with Tom’s ingrained reticence to talk very much
with anyone was his equal tendency to ponder deeply on
private thoughts. No one ever would have dreamed that for
two years or more he had turned over and over again in his
mind his father’s descriptions of exciting potentials that “up
Nawth” offered to free black people, and Tom had weighed
at great length proposing to the whole slave-row family that
instead of waiting more endless years trying to buy their
freedom, they should carefully plan and attempt a mass
escape to the North. He had reluctantly abandoned the idea
in realization that Gran’mammy Kizzy must be well into her
sixties, and old Sister Sarah and Miss Malizy, who seemed
the same as family, were in their seventies. He felt that
those three would have been the quickest to leave, but he
seriously doubted if any of them would survive the risks and
rigors of such a desperate gamble.
More recently, Tom had privately deduced that the
massa’s recent cockfight loss must have been even greater
than he had fully revealed. Tom had closely watched Massa
Lea becoming more strained, haggard, and aged with
each passing day and each emptied bottle of whiskey. But
Tom knew that the most disturbing evidence of something
deeply amiss was that by now, Lewis declared, the massa
had sold off at least half of his chickens, whose blood-lines
represented at least half a century of careful breeding.
Then Christmas came, and ushered in the New Year of
1856, as a heavy pall seemed to hang over not only the
slave row, but also the entire plantation. Then an early
spring afternoon, another rider came up the entry lane. At
first Miss Malizy appraised him as another chicken buyer.
But then, seeing how differently the massa greeted this
one, she grew apprehensive. Smiling and chitchatting with
the man as he dismounted, the massa yelled to the nearby
L’il George to feed, water, and stable the horse for the
night, then graciously Massa Lea squired his visitor inside.
Before Miss Malizy even began serving the big-house
supper, outside in slave row the family members were

exchanging fearful questions. “Who dat man anyhow?”...
“Ain’t never seen ’im befo’!”... “Massa ain’t acted like dat
no time recent!”... “Well, what you reckon him here fo’?”
They could hardly await the later arrival and report of Miss
Malizy.
“Dey ain’t talked in my hearin’ nothin’ ’mount to nothin’,”
she said. “Could be ’cause ol’ missis was right dere.” Then
Miss Malizy went on emphatically, “But somehow or ’nother,
I jes’ don’t nohow like dat odder man’s looks! Seed too
many like ’im befo’, shifty-eyed an’ tryin’ to act like dey’s
sump’n dey ain’t!”
A dozen pairs of slave-row eyes were monitoring the bighouse windows from slave row when the obvious
movements of a lamp told that Missis Lea had left the men
in the living room and made her way upstairs to bed. The
living room’s lamp was still burning when the last of the
slave-row family gave up the vigil and went to bed,
dreading the daybreak wake-up bell.
Matilda took her blacksmith son aside at her first chance,
before breakfast. “Tom, las’ night wasn’t no chance to tell
you private, and ain’t wanted to scare ever’body to death,
but Malizy tol’ me she heared massa say he got to pay two
mor’gage notes on dey house, an’ Malizy know dey ain’t
hardly got a penny! I jes’ feels to my feets dat white man’s a
nigger buyer!”
“Me too,” Tom said simply. He was silent for a moment.
“Mammy, I been thinkin’, wid some different massa we jes’
might fin’ ourselves better off. Dat is, long’s we all stays
together. Dat’s my big worry.”
As others began to come out of their cabins for the
morning, Matilda hurried away rather than unduly alarm
them by continuing the conversation.
After Missis Lea told Miss Malizy that she had a
headache and wanted no breakfast, the massa and his
visitor ate a hearty one, and then set out walking in the front
yard, busily talking, their heads close together. Before very
long, they sauntered alongside the big house, into the
backyard, and finally over to where Tom was pumping his
homemade bellows, sending yellowish sparks flying up

from his forge in which two flat sheets of iron were
approaching the heating necessary for their conversion into
door hinges. For several minutes the two men stood closely
watching Tom use long-handled tongs to remove the
cherry-red iron sheets. Deftly folding their middles tightly
about a shaping rod fixed into the hardy hole of his Fisher &
Norris anvil, forming the channel for hinge pins, he then
steel-punched three screw holes into each leaf. Taking up
his short-shanked cold chisel and his favorite homemade
four-pound hammer, he cut the leaves into the H-shaped
hinges that a customer had ordered, working all the while
as if unaware of his observers’ presence.
Massa Lea finally spoke. “He’s a pretty fair blacksmith, if
I do say so myself,” he said casually.
The other man grunted affirmatively. Then he began
moving around under the little blacksmithing shed, eyeing
the many examples of Tom’s craftsmanship that hung from
nails and pegs. Abruptly, the man addressed Tom directly.
“How old are you, boy?”
“Gwine on twenty-three now, suh.”
“How many young’uns you got?”
“Ain’t got no wife yet, suh.”
“Big, strong boy like you don’t need no wife to have
young’uns scattered everywhere.”
Tom said nothing, thinking how many white men’s
young’uns were scattered in slave rows.
“You maybe one of these real religious niggers?”
Tom knew the man was trying to draw him out for a
reason—almost certainly to size him up for purchase. He
said pointedly, “I’magines Massa Lea done tol’ you we’s
mostly a family here, my mammy, gran’mammy, an’
brothers an’ sisters an’ young’uns. We’s all been raised to
believe in de Lawd an’ de Bible, suh.”
The man’s eyes narrowed. “Which one of y’all reads the
Bible to the rest?”
Tom wasn’t about to tell this ominous stranger that both
his gran’mammy and mammy could read. He said, “Reckon
we all jes’ growed up hearin’ de Scriptures so much we
knows ’em by heart, suh.”

Seeming to relax, the man returned to his original
subject. “You think you could handle the blacksmithing on a
much bigger place than this one?”
Tom felt ready to explode with the further confirmation
that his sale was planned, but he had to know if the family
also was to be included. Through his rage to be dangled in
suspense like this, again he probed, “Well, suh, me an’ de
res’ us here can raise crops an’ do pret’ near ever’thing a
place need, I guess—”
Leaving the seething Tom as calmly as they had come,
the massa and his guest had no more than headed out
toward the fields when old Miss Malizy came hurrying from
the kitchen. “What dem mens sayin’, Tom? Missis can’t
even look me in de eye.”
Trying to control his voice, Tom said, “It’s gwine be some
sellin’, Miss Malizy, maybe all us, but could be jes’ me.”
Miss Malizy burst into tears, and Tom roughly shook her
shoulders. “Miss Malizy, ain’t no need o’ cryin’! Jes’ like I
tol’ mammy, I ’speck some new place see us better off dan
here wid ’im.” But try as Tom would, he couldn’t ease the
aged Miss Malizy’s grief.
Late that day the rest of them returned from the fields,
Tom’s brothers wearing grim, stricken faces amid the
women’s copious weeping and wailing. All of them were
trying at once to tell how the massa and his visitor also had
come out watching them as they worked, with the stranger
then moving from one to another asking questions that left
no doubt that they were being appraised for sale.
Until into the wee hours, there was no way that the three
people within the big house could have missed hearing the
rising pandemonium of grief and terror that arose among
the seventeen people in the slave row, most of the men
eventually reacting as hysterically as the women as they all
became seized in the contagion of grabbing and hugging
whomever was nearest, screaming that they would soon
never see each other again. “Lawd, deliver us from dis
eeeeevil!” shrieked Matilda in prayer.
Tom rang the next morning’s wake-up bell with a
prescience of doom.

Aged Miss Malizy had passed by him, making her way to
the big-house kitchen to prepare breakfast. Not ten minutes
later she heavily returned to slave row, her black face taut
with fresh shock and glistening with fresh tears: “Massa say
don’t nobody go nowhere. He say when he finish breakfas’,
he want ever’body ’sembled out here.... ”
Even sick, ancient Uncle Pompey was brought from his
cabin in his chair as all of them assembled, terrified.
When Massa Lea and his visitor came around the side of
the big house, Massa Lea’s lurching walk told seventeen
pairs of eyes that he had been drinking even more heavily
than usual, and when the pair of them stopped about four
yards before the slave-row people, the massa’s voice was
loud, angry, and slurred.
“Y’all niggers keep your noses always stuck in my
business, so ain’t no news to you this place goin’ broke.
Y’all too much burden for me to carry no more, so I’m doin’
some sellin’ to this gentleman here—”
At the chorus of shrieks and groans, the other man
gestured roughly. “ Shut up! All this carryin’ on since last
night!” He glared up and down the line until they quieted
down. “I ain’t no ordinary nigger trader. I represent one of
the biggest, finest firms in the business. We got branch
offices, and boats delivering niggers to order between
Richmond, Charleston, Memphis, and New Orleans—”
Matilda cried out the first anguish in all their minds. “We
gwine git sol’ together, Massa?”
“I told you shut up! You’ll find out! I ought not to have to
say your massa here’s a true gentleman, same as that fine
lady up in that house cryin’ her heart out about your black
hides. They could get more to sell y’all apiece, plenty
more!” He glanced at the quaking L’il Kizzy and Mary. “You
two wenches ready right now to start breedin’ pickaninnies
worth four hundred an’ up apiece.” His glance fell on
Matilda. “Even if you gittin’ pretty old, you said you know
how to cook. Down South a good cook’ll bring twelve to
fifteen hundred nowadays.” He looked at Tom. “The way
prices up now, reckon a prime stud blacksmith can easy
fetch twenty-five hundred, much as three thousand from

somebody wants you to take in customers like you doin’
here.” His eyes scanned across Tom’s five brothers
between twenty and twenty-eight years of age. “And y’all
field-hand bucks ought to be worth nine hundred to a
thousan’ apiece—” The slave trader paused for effect. “But
y’all one lucky bunch of niggers! Your missis insists y’all got
to be sold together, and your massa’s goin’ along with
that!”
“Thank you, Missis! Thank you, Jesus!” Gran’mammy
Kizzy cried out. “Praise God!” shrieked Matilda.
“SHUT UP!” The slave trader angrily gestured. “I’ve done
my best to convince ’em different, but I ain’t been able. And
it just happen my firm’s got some customers with a tobacco
plantation ain’t too far from here! Right near the North
Carolina Railroad Company over in Alamance County.
They’re wantin’ a family of niggers that’s been together an’
won’t give no trouble, no runaways or nothin’ like that, an’
with experience to handle everything on their place. Won’t
need no auctionin’ you off. I’m told won’t need no chainin’
you up, nothin’ like that, less’n I have some trouble!” He
surveyed them coldly. “All right, startin’ right now, y’all I’ve
spoke to consider yourselves my niggers ’til I get you
where you’re goin’. I’m givin’ you four days to put your stuff
together. Saturday morning we’ll get you moving over to
Alamance County in some wagons.”
Virgil was the first to find a stricken voice: “What ’bout my
Lilly Sue an’ chile over at the Curry place? You gwine buy
dem too, ain’t you, suh?”
Tom burst out, “An’ what ’bout our gran’mammy, Sister
Sarah, Miss Malizy, an’ Uncle Pompey? Dey’s fam’ly you
ain’t mentioned—”
“Ain’t meant to! Can’t be buyin’ every wench some
buck’s laid with, so he won’t feel lonely!” the slave trader
exclaimed sarcastically. “As for these old wrecks here, they
can’t hardly walk, let alone work, no customers gonna buy
them! But Mr. Lea’s being good enough to let ’em keep
dragging on around here.”
Amid an outburst of exclamations and weeping,
Gran’mammy Kizzy sprang squarely before Massa Lea,

words ripping from her throat, “You done sent off yo’ own
boy, can’t I leas’ have gran’chilluns?” As Massa Lea quickly
looked away, she slumped toward the ground; young,
strong arms grabbing and supporting her, while old Miss
Malizy and Sister Sarah screamed almost as one, “Dey’s
all de fam’ly I got, Massa!”... “Me, too, Massa! We’s fiftysome years togedder!” The invalid ancient Uncle Pompey
just sat, unable to rise from his chair, tears streaming down
his cheeks, staring blankly straight ahead, his lips moving
as in prayer.
“SHUT UP!” the slave trader yelled. “I’m tellin’ you the last
time! You find out quick I know how to handle niggers!”
Tom’s eyes sought and locked for a fleeting instant with
those of Massa Lea, and Tom hoarsely fully chose words,
“Massa, we’s sho’ sorry you’s met bad luck, an’ we knows
only reason you’s sellin’ us is you got to—”
Massa Lea seemed almost grateful before his eyes
again bent downward, and they had to strain to hear him.
“Naw, I ain’t got nothin”gainst none of y’all, boy—” He
hesitated. “Fact, I’d even call y’all good niggers, most of
y’all born and bred up right on my place.”
“Massa,” gently Tom begged, “if dem Alamance County
peoples won’t take our family’s ol’ folks, ain’t it some way
you lemme buy ’em from you? Dis man done jes’ say dey
ain’t worth much in money, an’ I pay you good price. I git on
my knees an’ beg de new massa lemme fin’ some hire-out
blacksmithin’, maybe for dat railroad, an’ my brothers hire
out and he’p too, suh.” Tom was abjectly pleading, tears
now starting down his cheeks, “Massa, all we makes we
sends you ’til we pays whatever you ax fo’ Gran’mammy
and dese three mo’ dat’s fam’ly to us. All we’s been through
togedder, we sho’ ’preciate stayin’ togedder, Massa—”
Massa Lea had stiffened. But he said, “Awright! Get me
three hundred dollars apiece, you can have ’em—” His
palm shot up before their exultation could fully erupt. “Hol’
on! They stay here ’til the money’s in my hand!”
Amid the groans and sobs, Tom’s voice came, bleak,
“Us kinda’spected mo’n dat from you, Massa, ’siderin’
everything.”

“Get ’em out of here, trader!” the massa snapped.
Turning on his heel, he walked rapidly toward the big
house.
Back in the desperately despairing slave row, even old
Miss Malizy and Sister Sarah were among those
comforting Gran’mammy Kizzy. She sat in her rocking
chair, that Tom had made for her, amid the welter of her
family hugging, kissing her, wetting her with their tears.
Everyone was crying.
From somewhere she found the strength, the courage to
rasp hoarsely, “Don’ y’all take on so! Me an’ Sarah, Malizy,
an’ Pompey jes’ wait here for George ’til he gits back. Ain’t
gwine be dat long, it’s awready gwine on de two years. If’n
he ain’t got de money to buy us, den I ’speck won’t take
much mo’ time fo’ Tom an’ res’ y’all boys will—”
Ashford gulped, “Yes’m, we sho’ will!” Wanly she smiled
at him, at them all. “’Nother thing,” Gran’mammy Kizzy went
on, “any y’all gits mo’ chilluns fo’ I sees you ag’in, don’t
forgit to tell ’em’bout my folks, my mammy Bell, an’ my
African pappy name Kunta Kinte, what be yo’ chillun’s
great-great gran’pappy! Hear me, now! Tell ’em ’bout me,
’bout my George, ’bout yo’selves, too! An’ ’bout what we
been through ’midst differen’ massas. Tell de chilluns all de
res’ about who we is!”
Amid a snuffling chorus of “We sho’ will”... “Ain’t gon’
never fo’git, Gran’mammy,” she brushed the nearest faces
with her hand, “SHUSH, now! Ever’thing gwine be fine!
Heish up, done tol’ you! Y’all gwine flood me right out de
do’!”
Four days somehow passed with those who were leaving
getting packed, and finally Saturday morning came.
Everyone had been up through most of the night. With
scarcely a word uttered, they gathered, holding each
other’s hands, watching the sun come up. Finally the
wagons arrived. One by one those who were leaving turned
silently to embrace those who were to remain behind.
“Where’s Uncle Pompey?” asked someone.
Miss Malizy said, “Po’ ol’ soul tol’ me las’ night he
couldn’t stan’ to see y’all go—”

“I run kiss ’im, anyhow!” exclaimed L’il Kizzy, and went
running toward the cabin.
In a little while, they heard her: “Oh, NO!”
Others already on the ground, or leaping from the wagon,
went dashing. The old man sat there in his chair. And he
was dead.

CHAPTER 105
On the new plantation, it wasn’t until the next Sunday, when
Massa and Missis Murray drove off in their buggy to attend
church services, that the whole family had a chance to sit
down together for a talk.
“Well, I sho’ ain’t want to judge too quick,” said Matilda,
looking around at all of her brood, “but all through de week
me an’ Missis Murray done plenty talkin’ in de kitchen whilst
I been cookin’. I got to say she an’ dis new massa soun’s
like good Christian peoples. I feels like we’s gwine be
whole lot better off here,’cept yo’ pappy still ain’t back, an’
Gran’mammy an’ dem still at Massa Lea’s.” Again studying
her children’s faces, she asked, “Well, from what y’all’s
seed an’ heared, how y’all feel?”
Virgil spoke. “Well, dis Massa Murray don’t seem like he
know much ’bout farmin’, or bein’ no massa, neither.”
Matilda interrupted. “Dat’s ’cause dey was town folks
runnin’ a sto’ in Burlington, ’til his uncle died an’ in ’is will
lef’em dis place.”
Virgil said, “Ever’ time he done talked to me, he’s said
he lookin’ fo’ a white oberseer to hire to work us. I done
kept tellin’ ’im ain’t no need to spend dat money, dat
worse’n a oberseer he needed leas’ five, six mo’ fiel’ han’s.
Tol’ ’im jes’ give us chance, we raise ’im good tobacco
crops by ourself—”
Ashford broke in, “I ain’t stayin’ long nowhere wid no
cracker oberseer trackin’ every move!”
After a pointed look at Ashford, Virgil went on. “Massa
Murray say he watch awhile an’ see how we do.” He
paused. “I jes’ ’bout begged ’im to buy my Lilly Sue an’
young’un from Massa Curry back yonder an’ bring ’em
here. Tol’ ’im Lilly Sue work hard as anybody he ever gon’
git. He say he think ’bout it, but to buy us, dey already done
had to take out a bank mor’gage on de big house, an’ he
see how much ’baccy he sell dis year.” Virgil paused. “So
we all got to pitch in! I can tell odder white folks been givin’

’im plenty advisin’ niggers won’t half work by deyselves. Let
’im see any hangin’ back an’ playin’ roun’, we sho’ liable
win’ up wid some oberseer.” Glancing again at the sullen
Ashford, Virgil added, “Fac’, I ’speck it be good when
Massa Murray ride out where we’s workin’ I’ll holler at y’all
some, but y’all know why.”
“Sho’!” burst out Ashford, “you an’ somebody else I
knows always tries to be massa’s special nigger!”
Tom tensed, but managed to seem as if he totally
ignored Ashford’s remark while Virgil half rose, lancing
forward a work-calloused forefinger, “Boy, lemme tell you,
sump’n wrong anybody don’ git ’long wid nobody! Gwine git
you in big trouble one dese days! Jes’ speakin’ fo’ myself,
if’n it be’s wid me, somebody gwine carry off one us!”
“Heish! Bofe y’all heish up dat mess!” Matilda glared at
them both, then particularly at Ashford, before turning an
entreating look onto Tom, clearly seeking an easing of the
sudden tension. “Tom, whole lot o’ times I seen you an’
Massa Murray talkin’ down dere while you puttin’ up yo’
shop. What’s yo’ feelin’s?”
Slowly, thoughtfully, Tom said, “I ’gree we ought to be
better off here. But ’pend a lot on how we handles it. Like
you said, Massa Murray don’t ’pear no mean, lowdown
white man. I feel like Virgil say, he jes’ ain’t had much
’sperience to put no trus’ in us. Even mo’n dat, I b’leeve he
worried we git to figgerin’ he’s easy, dat’s how come he
make hisself act an’ soun’ harder’n he na’chly is, an’ dat’s
how come de oberseer talk.” Tom paused. “Way I sees it,
mammy handle de missis. Res’ us needs to teach de
massa he do fine jes’ leave us ’lone.”
After murmurs of approval, Matilda’s tone was vibrant
with her joy at clearly a potentially promising family future,
“Well, now, linin’ it up, long wid what y’all says, we’s got to
’suade Massa Murray to buy Lilly Sue an’ dat l’il Uriah, too.
’Bout y’all’s pappy, ain’t nothin’ we can do but jes’ wait. He
walk in here one dese days—”
Giggling, Mary interrupted, “Wid dat green scarf trailin’,
an’ black derby settin’ upon his head!”
“Sho’ right ’bout dat, daughter,” Matilda smiled with the

others. She went on. “An’ ’cose I ain’t even got to say ’bout
gittin’ Gran’mammy, Sarah, an’ Malizy. I already got Missis
Murray promised to he’p wid dat. ’Scribed to ’er stronges’ I
could how it jes’ ’bout tore us all up to have to leave ’em.
Lawd! Missis got to cryin’ hard as I was! She say weren’t
no use nobody includin’ her axin’ Massa Murray to buy no
three real ol’ womens, but she promsie faithful she ax
massa to git Tom hire-out jobs, an’ de res’ y’all boys, too.
So le’s all keep in mind we ain’t jes’ here workin’ for ’nother
massa, we’s workin’ to git our fam’ly back togedder.”
With that resolve, the family settled into the planting
season of 1856, with Matilda commanding the increasing
trust and appreciation of both Missis and Massa Murray
through her clear loyalty and sincerity, her excellent
cooking, and her spotless housekeeping. The massa saw
how Virgil steadily urged and pressed his brothers and
sisters toward a bumper tobacco crop. He saw Tom visibly
putting the plantation into an enviable state of repair, his
talented hands wielding his mostly homemade tools,
transforming foraged old rusted, discarded, scrap iron into
eventually scores of sturdy new farming tools and
implements, along with both functional and decorative
household items.
Nearly every Sunday afternoon, unless the Murrays had
gone off somewhere themselves, various of the local
plantation families would pay them welcoming visits, along
with their old friends from Burlington, Graham, Haw River,
Mebane, and other towns around. In showing their guests
about the big house and yards, the Murrays always proudly
pointed out different examples of Tom’s craftsmanship.
Few of their farm or township guests left without urging that
the massa permit Tom to make or repair something for
them, and Massa Murray would agree. Gradually more of
Tom’s custom-made articles appeared about Alamance
County, as word of mouth further advertised him, and
Missis Murray’s original request that the massa seek hireout jobs for Tom became entirely unnecessary. Soon, every
day saw slave men, young and old, come riding on mules,
or sometimes afoot, bringing broken tools or other items for

Tom to fix. Some massas or missis sketched decorative
items they wanted made for their homes. Or sometimes
customers’ requests required that Massa Murray write out a
traveling pass for Tom to ride a mule to other plantations, or
into local towns, to make on-site repairs or installations. By
1857, Tom was working from dawn to dark every day
excepting Sundays, his over-all volume of work at least
equaling that of Mr. Isaiah, who had taught him. The
customers would pay Massa Murray, either at the big house
or when they saw him at church, such rates as fourteen
cents a hoof for the shoeing of horses, mules, or oxen,
thirty-seven cents for a new wagon tire, eighteen cents to
mend a pitchfork, or six cents to sharpen a pick. Prices for
customer-designed decorative work were specially
negotiated, such as five dollars for a trellis-shaped front
gate adorned with oak leaves. And each weekend Massa
Murray figured out for Tom’s pay ten cents of each dollar
that his work had brought in during the previous week. After
thanking the massa, Tom gave the weekly sum to his
mother Matilda, who soon had it buried in one of her glass
jars whose locations only she and Tom knew.
On Saturday noons the workweek ended for the family’s
field hands. L’il Kizzy and Mary, now nineteen and
seventeen, respectively, quickly bathed, wrapped their
short, kinky braids tightly with string, and rubbed their faces
to shiny blackness with beeswax. Then donning their best
starchily ironed cotton-print dresses, they soon appeared at
the blacksmith shop, one bringing a pitcher of water, or
sometimes “lemonegg,” with the other carrying a gourd
dipper. Once Tom had quenched his thirst, they next
offered welcomed gourdfuls among each Saturday
afternoon’s invariable small gathering of slave men whose
massas had sent them to pick up items that Tom had
promised to complete by the weekend. Tom noted, with wry
amusement, how his sisters’ lightest, gayest banter was
always with the better-looking younger men. One Saturday
night he was not surprised to overhear Matilda shrilly
voicing chastisement: “I ain’t blin’! Sees y’all down dere
flouncin’ yo’ tails ’mongst dem mens!” L’il Kizzy came back

defiantly, “Well, Mammy, we’s wimmins! Ain’t met no mens
at Massa Lea’s!” Matilda loudly muttered something that
Tom couldn’t distinguish, but he suspected that she was
privately less disapproving than she was trying to act. It was
confirmed when, shortly after, Matilda said to him, “Look
like you lettin’ dem two gals go to courtin’ right under yo’
nose. Reckon de leas’ you can do is keep out a eye it ain’t
de wrong ones dey hooks up wid!”
To the entire family’s astonishment, not the particularly
“flouncy” L’il Kizzy but the much quieter Mary soon quietly
announced her wish to “jump de broom” with a stablehand
from a plantation near the village of Mebane. She pleaded
to Matilda, “I knows you can he’p ’suade massa to sell me
reasonable when Nicodemus’ massa ax ’im ’bout it,
Mammy, so us can live togedder!” But Matilda only
muttered vaguely, sending Mary into tears.
“Lawd, Tom, I jes’ don’t know how to feel!” Matilda said.
“’Cose I’se happy fo’ de gal, I see she so happy. But jes’
hates to see any us sol’ off no mo’.”
“You’s wrong, Mammy. You knows you is!” Tom said. “I
sho’ wouldn’t want to be married wid nobody livin’
somewhere else. Look what happened to Virgil. Ever since
we got sol’, you can see he sick ’bout Lilly Sue lef’ back
yonder.”
“Son,” she said, “don’t tell me ’bout bein’ married to
somebody you don’ never hardly see! Whole lot o’ times,
lookin’ at y’all chilluns he’p me know I got a husban’—”
Matilda hesitated. “But gittin’ back to Mary leavin’, ain’t jes’
her on my min’, it’s all y’all. You workin’ so much guess you
ain’t paid no ’tention, but on Sundays off nowdays don’
hardly never see yo’ brudders roun’ here no mo’, jes’ you
an’ Virgil. De res’ all off co’tin’ heavy—”
“Mammy,” Tom sharply interrupted, “we’s grown mens!”
“Sho’ you is!” retorted Matilda. “Ain’t what I’m gittin’ at!
I’se meanin’ it look like dis fam’ly gwine split to de winds fo’
we ever gits it back togedder!”
In a silent moment between them, Tom was trying to think
of what comforting thing he might say, sensing that
underlying his mother’s recent quick irritability or

unaccustomed depressions were the months now passed
beyond when his father should have returned. As she had
just mentioned, she was again living with his absence.
Tom was shocked when abruptly Matilda glanced at him,
“When you gwine git married?”
“Ain’t thinkin’ ’bout dat now—” Embarrassed, he
hesitated, and changed the subject. “Thinkin’ ’bout us gittin’
back Gran’mammy, Sister Sarah, an’ Miss Malizy. Mammy,
’bout how much we got saved up now?”
“No ’bout! Tell you ’zactly! Dat two dollars’ an’ fo’ cents
you give me las’ Sunday make it eighty-seben dollars an’
fifty-two cents.”
Tom shook his head. “I’se got to do better—”
“Sho’ wish Virgil an’ dem was he’pin’ mo’.”
“Can’t blame dem. Hire-out fiel’ work jes’ hard to fin’,
’cause mos’ massas needin’ it hires free niggers what
works fit to kill deyselves to git dat twenty-five cents a day
less’n dey starves. I jes’ got to make mo’! Gran’mammy,
Sister Sarah, an’ Miss Malizy, dey’s all gittin’ ol’!”
“Yo’ gran’mammy right roun’ sebenty now, an’ Sarah an’
Malizy nigh ’bout eighty.”
A sudden thought struck Matilda; her features took on a
faraway expression. “Tom, you know what jes’ come to
me? Yo’ gran’mammy use to say her African pappy kep’ up
wid how ol’ he was by droppin’ l’il rocks in a gourd. You
’member her sayin’ dat?”
“Yas’m, sho’ does.” He paused. “Wonder how ol’ was
he?”
“Ain’t never heard, leas’ not to my recollection.” A
puzzlement grew on her face. “Would ’pend when was you
talkin’ ’bout. He’d o’ been one age when Gran’mammy
Kizzy was sol’ from him an’ her mammy. Den he’d o’ been
’nother age whenever de Lawd claimed’im—” She
hesitated. “Wid Gran’mammy pushin’ seb’nty, you know her
pappy got to be long dead’n gone. Her mammy, too. Po’
souls!”
“Yeah—” said Tom, musing. “Sometime I wonders what
dey looked like. Done heared so much ’bout ’em.”
Matilda said, “Me, too, son.” She straightened in her

chair. “But gittin’ back to yo’ gran’mammy, Sarah, an’
Malizy, every night down on my knees, I jes’ ax de Lawd to
be wid ’em an’ I prays any day yo’ pappy git dere wid lump
o’ money in ’is pocket an’ buy’em.” She laughed brightly.
“One mawnin’ we looks up an’ dere all fo’ be, free as
birds!”
“Dat be sho’ one sight to see!” grinned Tom.
A silence fell between them, each in their private
thoughts. Tom was pondering that now was as good a time
and atmosphere as any to confide in his mother something
he had kept carefully guarded from anyone, but which now
did seem likely to develop further.
He used as his avenue an earlier query of Matilda’s.
“Mammy, while back you ax if ’n I ever think maybe ’bout
gittin’ married?”
Matilda jerked upright, her face and eyes alight. “Yeah,
son?”
Tom could have kicked himself for ever having brought it
up. He all but squirmed seeking how to go on. Then, firmly,
“Well, I’se kinda met a gal, an’ we been talkin’ some—”
“Lawd-a-mussy, Tom! Who?”
“Ain’t nobody you knows! Her name Irene. Some calls ’er
’Reeny.’ She b’longst to dat Massa Edwin Holt, work in dey
big house—”
“De rich Massa Holt massa and missis talks ’bout own
dat cotton mill on Alamance Creek?”
“Yas’m—”
“Dey big house where you put up dem pretty window
grills?”
“Yas’m—” Tom’s expression was rather like that of a
small boy caught taking cookies.
“Lawd!” A beaming spread across Matilda’s face.
“Somebody cotched ol’ coon at las’!” Springing up,
suddenly embracing her embarrassed son, she burbled,
“I’se so happy fo’ y’all, Tom, sho’ is!”
“Hol’ on! Hol’ on, Mammy!” Extricating himself, he
gestured her back toward her chair. “I jes’ say we been
talkin’.”
“Boy, you’s my close-mouthdes’ young’un since you first

drawed breath! If you ’mits you’s much as seed a gal, I
know it mo’ to it dan dat!”
He all but glared at her. “Don’ want no whisperin’ to
nobody, you hear me?”
“I know massa buy ’er fo’ you, boy! Tell me mo’ ’bout ’er,
Tom!” So much was tumbling in Matilda’s head that it
poured out together... across the back of her mind flashed
a vision of the wedding cakes she would bake...
“Gittin’ late, got to go—” But she beat him to the door.
“So glad somebody be catchin’ all y’all young’uns fo’ long!
You’s jes’ my bes’!” Matilda’s laughter was the happiest
Tom had seen her in a long time. “Gittin’ older, guess I’se
same as Gran’mammy Kizzy, wantin’ mo’ gran’chilluns!”
Tom brushed past, hearing her as he strode outside, “I live
long ’nough, might even see some great-gran’chilluns!”

CHAPTER 106
A Sunday several months before, Massa and Missis
Murray had returned home from church, and the massa
almost immediately rang the bell for Matilda, whom he told
to have Tom come around to the front porch.
The massa’s pleasure was showing both in his face and
in his tone as he told Tom that Mr. Edwin Holt, who owned
the Holt Cotton Mill, had sent him a message that Missis
Holt had recently been highly impressed with seeing some
of Tom’s delicate ironwork; that she had already sketched
a design for decorative window grills that they hoped that
Tom could soon make and install at their “Locust Grove”
home.
With a traveling pass from Massa Murray, Tom left on a
mule early the next morning to see the sketches and
measure the windows. Massa Murray had told him not to
worry about whatever jobs awaited doing in his shop, and
the massa said that the best route was to follow the Haw
River Road to the town of Graham, then the Graham Road
to Bellemont Church, where after a right turn and about
another two miles, the elegant Holt mansion would be
impossible to miss.
Arriving and identifying himself to a black gardener, Tom
was told to wait near the front steps. Missis Holt herself
soon came pleasantly congratulating Tom’s previous work
that she had seen, and showing him her sketches, which he
carefully studied for an iron window grill having the visual
effect of a trellis amply covered with vines and leaves.
“B’leeves I can do dem, leas’ I try my bes’, Missis,” he said,
but he pointed out that with so many windows needing the
grills, each of which would require much patiently tedious
work, the completing of the task might take two months.
Missis Holt said she would be delighted if it could be done
in that time, and handing Tom her sketches to keep and
work by, she left him to go about his necessary starting job
of carefully measuring the many windows’ dimensions.

By the early afternoon, Tom was working on the upstairs
windows opening onto a veranda when his instincts
registered someone watching him, and glancing about, he
blinked at the striking prettiness of the copperycomplexioned girl holding a dustrag who stood quietly just
within the next opened window. Wearing a simple
housemaid’s uniform, her straight black hair coiled into a
large bun at the back of her head, she was evenly but
warmly returning Tom’s stare. Only his lifelong innate
reserve enabled him to mask his jolting inner reaction as,
collecting himself, and quickly removing his hat, he blurted,
“Hidy, miss.”
“Hidy do, suh!” she replied, flashing a bright smile, and
with that she disappeared.
Finally riding back to the Murray plantation, Tom was
surprised, and unsettled, that he couldn’t rid his mind of her.
Lying in his bed that night, it hit him like a bolt that he hadn’t
even gotten her name. He guessed her age at nineteen or
maybe twenty. At last he slept, fitfully, and awakened
torturing himself that her prettiness guaranteed that she
was married, or surely was courting with somebody.
Making the basic grill frames, smoothly lap-welding four
precut flat iron bars into window-sized rectangles was only
a routine job. After six days of doing that, Tom began
forcing white-hot rods through his set of successively
smaller steel reducing dies until he had long rods no thicker
than ivy or honeysuckle vines. After Tom had experimentally
heated and variously bent several of these, dissatisfied, he
began taking early-morning walks, closely inspecting actual
growing vines’ graceful curvings and junctures. Then he had
a sense that his efforts to simulate them improved.
The work went along well, with Massa Murray explaining
daily to sometimes irate customers that Tom could attend
only the most urgent emergency repair jobs until he had
finished a major job for Mr. Edwin Holt, which blunted the
indignance of most. Massa Murray, then Missis Murray
came to the shop to observe, then they brought visiting
friends, until sometimes eight or ten of them stood silently
watching Tom work. Plying his craft, he thought how

blessed he was that all people seemed even to expect
being ignored by blacksmiths engrossed in what they were
doing. He reflected upon how most slave men who brought
him their massas’ repairing jobs usually seemed either
morose, or they big-talked among other slaves about the
shop. But if any white people appeared, in the instant, all of
the slaves grinned, shuffled, and otherwise began acting
the clown, as in fact Tom often previously had felt
embarrassed to conclude privately of his own derbywearing, bombastic-talking father, Chicken George.
Tom felt further blessed with how sincerely he enjoyed
feeling immersed, to a degree even isolated, within his
world of blacksmithing. As he worked on the window grills
from the daylights until he could no longer see, his private
random musings would occupy his mind sometimes for
hours before he again caught himself thinking of the pretty
housemaid he had met.
Making the leaves for the window grills would be his
toughest test, he had realized from when Missis Holt first
showed him her sketches. Again Tom walked, now intently
studying nature’s leaves. Heating and reheating inchsquare iron pieces, beating them with his heavy, squarefaced hammer into delicately thin sheets, with his trimming
shears he cut out eventually scores of oversized heartshaped patterns. Since such thin metal could quickly burn
and ruin if a forge was too hot, he pumped his homemade
bellows with utmost care, hastily tonging each red-hot thin
sheet onto his anvil and deftly shaping it into leafy contours
with quick tappings of his lightest ball-point hammer.
With intricate welding, Tom delicately veined his leaves,
and next stemmed them onto the vines. He felt it good that
no two looked exactly the same, as he had observed in
nature. Finally in his seventh intensive week, Tom spotwelded his leafy vines onto their waiting window-grill
frames.
“Tom, I ’clare look like dey jes’ growin’ somewheres!”
Matilda exclaimed it, staring in awe at her son’s
craftsmanship. Scarcely less demonstrative was L’il Kizzy,
who by now was flirting openly with three local young slave

swains. Even Tom’s brothers and their wives—only Ashford
and Tom were single now—cast glances that mirrored their
further heightened respect for him. Massa and Missis
Murray could hardly contain the extent of their pleasure, as
well as their pride, that they owned such a blacksmith.
In the wagon laden with window grills, Tom drove alone to
the Holt big house to install them. When he held up one for
Missis Holt to inspect, exclaiming and clapping her hands,
ecstatic with pleasure, she called outside her teen-aged
daughter and several grown young sons who happened to
be there, and all of them joined instantly in congratulating
Tom.
Right away, he began the installations. After two hours,
the downstairs window grills were in place, being further
admired by the Holt family members, as well as several of
their slaves; he guessed that their grapevine must have
sped word of their missis’ delight and they had come
running to see for themselves. Where was she? Tom was
tense from wondering it as one of the Holt sons directed
him through the polished downstairs foyer to mount the
curving stairs to install the remaining grills at the secondfloor veranda windows.
It was the very area where she had been before. How,
whom, might he query, without seeming more than curiously
interested, as to who she was, where she was, and what
was her status? In his frustration, Tom went at his work
even faster; he must finish quickly and leave, he told
himself.
He was installing the third upstairs window grill when
after a rush of footsteps there she was, flushed, nearly
breathless from hurrying. He stood just tongue-tied.
“Hidy, Mr. Murray!” It jolted him to realize she wouldn’t
know of “Lea,” only that a Massa Murray owned him now.
He fumbled off his straw hat.
“Hidy, Miss Holt....”
“Was down in de smokehouse smokin’ meat, jes’ heared
you was here—” Her gaze swept to the last window grill he
had fixed into place. “Ooh, it jes’ beautiful!’ she breathed.
“Passed Missis Emily downstairs jes’ havin’ a fit ’bout what

you done.”
His glance flicked her field-hand headrag. “I thought you
was a housemaid—” It sounded such an inane thing to say.
“I loves doin’ different things, an’ dey lets me,” she said,
glancing about. “I jes’ run up here a minute. Better git back
to workin’, an’ you, too—”
He had to know more, at least her name. He asked her.
“Irene,” she said. “Dey calls me ’Reeny. What your’n?”
“Tom,” he said. As she had said, they had to get back to
work.
He had to gamble. “Miss Irene, is—is you keepin’
company wid anybody?”
She looked at him so long, so hard, he knew he had
terribly blundered. “I ain’t never been knowed for not
speakin’ my mind, Mr. Murray. When I seed befo’ how shy
you was, I was scairt you wouldn’t come talk wid me no
mo’.”
Tom could have fallen off the veranda.
From then, he had begun asking Massa Murray for an allday traveling pass each Sunday, along with permission to
use the mulecart. He told his family as well that he searched
the roadsides for discarded metal objects to freshly supply
his blacksmith shop scrap pile. He nearly always did find
something useful while driving different routes in the round
trip of about two hours each way to see Irene.
Not only she, but the others whom he met at the Holts’
slave row could not have received or treated him more
warmly. “You’s so shy, smart as you is, folks jes’ likes you,”
Irene candidly told him. They would ride usually to some
reasonably private fairly nearby place where Tom would
unhitch the mule to let it graze on a long tether as they
walked, with Irene doing by far the most talking.
“My pappy a Injun. He name Hillian, my mammy say.
Dat’count fo’ de ’culiar color I is,” Irene volunteered matterof-factly. “Way back, my mammy run off from a real mean
massa, an’ in de woods some Injuns cotched her an’ took
her to dey village where her an’ my pappy got togedder an’
I got borned. I weren’t much size when some white mens
’tacked de village, an’ ’mongst de killin’ captured my

mammy an’ brung us back to her massa. She say he beat
her bad an’ sol’ us to some nigger trader, an’ Massa Holt
bought us, what was lucky, ’cause dey’s high-quality folks
—” Her eyes narrowed. “Well, leas’ mos’ly. Anyhow,
Mammy was dey washin’ an’ ironin’ woman, right up ’til she
took sick an’ died ’bout fo’ years back, an’ I been here ever
since. I’se eighteen now, gwine turn nineteen New Year’s
Day—” She looked at Tom in her frank way. “How ol’ is
you?”
“Twenty-fo’,” Tom said.
Telling Irene in turn the essential facts about his family,
Tom said that as yet they had but little knowledge of this
new region of North Carolina into which they had been sold.
“Well,” she said, “I’se picked up a heap ’cause de Holts
is mighty’portant folks, so nigh ever’body big comes visitin’,
an’ gin’ly I be’s servin’, an’ I got ears.”
“Dey says mos’ dese Alamance County white folks’
great-great-gran’daddies come here from Pennsylvania
long fo’ dat Revolution War, when wasn’t much nobody
herebouts ’cept Sissipaw Injuns. Some calls ’em
Saxapaws. But English white so’jers kilt dem out ’til
Saxapaw River de only thing even got dey name now—”
Irene grimaced. “My massa say dey’d run from hard times
crost de water an’ was crowdin’ Pennsylvania so bad dem
Englishmans runnin’ de Colonies ’nounced all de lan’ dey
wanted be sellin’ in dis part Nawth Ca’liny fo’ less’n two
cents a acre. Well, massa say no end o’ Quakers,
Presbyterian Scotch-Irishers, an’ German Lutherans
squeezed ever’thin’ dey could in covered wagons an’ crost
dem Cumberlan’ an’ Shenando’ valleys. Massa say sump’n
like fo’ hundred miles. Dey bought what lan’ dey could an’
commence diggin’, clearin’, an’ farmin’, jes’ mos’ly small
farms dey worked deyselves, like mos’ dis county’s white
folks herebouts still does. Dat’s how come ain’t many
niggers as where it’s great big plantations.”
Irene toured Tom on the following Sunday to her massa’s
cotton mill on a bank of Alamance Creek, prideful as if both
the mill and the Holt family were her own.
After his hard work attending weekly scores of

blacksmithing jobs, Tom coveted each next Sunday when
the cart rolled past the miles of split-rail fences enclosing
crops of corn, wheat, tobacco, and cotton, with an
occasional apple or peach orchard and modest
farmhouses. Passing other blacks, who were nearly always
afoot, they exchanged waves, Tom hoping they understood
that if he offered a ride, it would rob his privacy with Irene.
Abruptly stopping the mule sometimes, he would jump out
and throw into the cart’s rear some rusty discarded metal
he had spied while driving. Once Irene startled him, also
jumping out, picking a wild rose. “Ever since I was a l’il gal
I’se loved roses,” she told him.
Meeting white people also out driving, or on horseback,
Tom and Irene would become as two statues, with both
them and the white people staring straight ahead. Tom
commented after a while that since in Alamance County he
felt he had seen fewer “po’ cracker” type of whites than
abounded where he previously lived.
“I knows dem turkey-gobbler rednecks kin’ you mean,”
she said. “Naw, ain’t many roun’ here. Any you sees be’s
gin’ly jes’ passin’ through. De big white folks haves less
use fo’ ’em dan dey does niggers.”
Tom expressed surprise at how Irene seemed to know
something of every crossroads store they passed, or
church, school-house, wagon shop, or whatever. “Well, I jes’
hears massa tellin’ guests how his folks had sump’n to do
wid pret’ near ever’thin’ in Alamance County,” was how
Irene explained it, then identifying a gristmill that they were
passing as belonging to her massa, she said, “He turn lotta
his wheat into flour, an’ his cawn into whiskey to sell in
Fayetteville.”
Privately, Tom gradually wearied of what began to sound
to him as if Irene relished a running chronology of implied
praises of her owner and his family. A Sunday when they
ventured into the county-seat town of Graham, she said,
“De year dat big California gol’ rush, my massa’s daddy
’mongst de big mens what bought de lan’ an’ built dis town
to be de county seat.” The next Sunday, as they drove along
the Salisbury Road, she pointed out a prominent rock

marker, “Right dere on massa’s gran’daddy’s plantation
dey fought de Battle o’ Alamance. Folks sick o’ dat king’s
bad treatments took dey guns to his redcoats, an’ massa
say dat battle what lit de fuse fo’ de ’Merican Revolution
War roun’ five years later on.”
By this time, Matilda had grown irate. It had strained her
patience to the limit to suppress the exciting secret for so
long. “What’s de matter wid you? Ack like you don’t want
nobody to see yo’ Injun gal!”
Checking his irritance, Tom only mumbled something
unintelligible, and an exasperated Matilda hit below the
belt. “Maybe she too good fo’ us ’cause she b’longst to sich
big-shot folks!”
For the first time Tom had ever done such a thing, he
stalked away from his mother, refusing to dignify that with a
reply.
He wished there was someone, anyone, with whom he
could talk about what had become his deep uncertainties
regarding his continuing to keep company with Irene.
He had finally admitted to himself how much he loved her.
Along with her pretty mixed black and Indian features,
unquestionably she was as charming, tantalizing, and smart
a potential mate as he would have dreamed for. Yet being
as inherently deliberate and careful as he was, Tom felt that
unless two vital worries he had developed about Irene got
solved, they could never enjoy a truly successful union.
For one thing, deep within, Tom neither completely liked,
nor completely trusted any white person, his own Massa
and Missis Murray included. It seriously bothered him that
Irene seemed actually to adore if not worship the whites
who owned her; it strongly suggested that they would never
see eye to eye on a vital matter.
His second concern, seeming even less soluble, was that
the Holt family seemed scarcely less devoted to Irene, in
the way that some prosperous massa families often came
to regard certain household slaves. He knew that he could
never survive the charade of mating with any woman, then
living apart on different plantations, involving the steady
indignity of their having to ask their respective massas to

approve occasional marital visits.
Tom had even given thought to what might be the most
honorable way, though he knew that any would be
excruciating, to withdraw from seeing Irene any further.
“What de matter, Tom?” she asked him on the next
Sunday, her tone full of concern.
“Ain’t nothin’.”
They rode on silently for a while. Then she said in her
candid, open manner, “Well, ain’t gwine press you if you
don’ want to say, jes’ long as you knows I knows sump’n
workin’ hard on you.”
Hardly aware of the reins in his hands, Tom thought that
among Irene’s qualities that he most admired were her
frankness and honesty, yet for weeks, months, he had been
actually dishonest with her, in the sense that he had evaded
telling her his true thoughts, however painful it might prove
to them both. And the longer he delayed would be
continued dishonesty, as well as dragging out his bitter
frustrations.
Tom strained to sound casual. “While back, ’member I
tol’ you how my brudder Virgil’s wife had to stay wid her
massa when us got sol’?” It being unconnected with his
point, he did not speak of how after his own recent personal
appeal, Massa Murray had traveled to Caswell County and
successfully had purchased Lilly Sue and her son Uriah.
Forcing himself to go on, Tom said, “Jes’ feel like if I was
ever maybe git thinkin’ ’bout matin’ up wid anybody... well,
jes’ don’t b’leeve I could if’n we s’pose to be livin’ on
different massas’ plantations.”
“Me neither!” Her response was so quickly emphatic that
Tom nearly dropped the reins, doubting his ears. He jerked
about toward her, agape. “What you mean?” he
stammered.
“Same as you jes’ said!”
He practically accosted her, “You know Massa an’ Missis
Holt ain’t gwine sell you!”
“I git sol’ whenever I gits ready!” She looked at him
calmly.
Tom felt a weakness coursing throughout his body. “How

you talkin ’bout?”
“Not meanin’ to soun’ short, dat ain’t yo’ worry, it be’s
mine.”
Limply, Tom heard himself saying, “Well, whyn’t you git
sol’ den—”
She seemed hesitant. He nearly panicked.
She said, “Awright. You got any special time?”
“Reckon dat up to you, too—”
His mind was racing. What earthly sum would her massa
demand for such a prize as she was... if this was not all
some wild dream in the first place?
“You got to ax yo’ massa if he buy me.”
“He buy you,” he said with more certainty than he felt. He
felt like a fool then, asking, “How much you reckon you be
costin’? Reckon he need to have a idea o’ dat.”
“’Speck dey’ll take whatever he offer, reasonable.”
Tom just stared at her, and Irene at him.
“Tom Murray, you’s in some ways de ’zasperatines’ man
I’se ever seed! I could o’ tol’ you dat since de day we firs’
met! Long as I been waitin’ fo’ you to say sump’n! You jes’
wait ’til I gits hol’ o’ you, gwine knock out some dat
stubbornness!” He scarcely felt her small fists pummeling
his head, his shoulders, as he took his first woman into his
arms, the mule walking without guidance.
That night, lying abed, Tom began to see in his mind’s
eye how he was going to make for her a rose of iron. In a
trip to the county seat he must buy only a small bar of the
finest newly wrought iron. He must closely study a rose, how
its stem and base were joined, how the petals spread,
each curving outward in its own way... how to heat the iron
bar to just the orange redness for its quickest hammering to
the wafer thinness from which he would trim the rose petals’
patterns that once reheated and tenderly, lovingly shaped,
would be dipped into brine mixed with oil, insuring her rose
petals’ delicate temper...

CHAPTER 107
First hearing the sound, then rapidly advancing upon the
totally startling sight of her treasured housemaid Irene
huddled down and heavily sobbing behind where the lower
staircase curved into an are, Missis Emily Holt instantly
reacted in alarm. “What is it, Irene?” Missis Emily bent,
grasping and shaking the heaving shoulders. “Get yourself
up from there this minute and tell me! What is it?”
Irene managed to stumble upright while gasping to her
missis of her love for Tom, whom she said she wished to
marry, rather than continuing her struggle to resist her
regular pursuit by certain young massas. Pressed by a
suddenly agitated Missis Holt to reveal their identities, Irene
through her tears blurted out two names.
That evening before dinner, a shaken Massa and Missis
Holt agreed that it was clearly in the best interests of the
immediate family circle to be sold to Massa Murray and
quickly.
Still, because Missis and Massa Holt genuinely liked
Irene, and highly approved of her choice of Tom for a mate,
they insisted that Massa and Missis Murray let them host
the wedding and reception dinner. All members of both the
white and black Holt and Murray families would attend in
the Holt big-house front yard, with their minister performing
the ceremony and Massa Holt himself giving away the
bride.
But amid the lovely, moving occasion, the outstanding
sensation was the delicately hand-wrought perfect longstemmed rose of iron that the groom Tom withdrew from
inside his coat pocket and tenderly presented to his radiant
bride. Amid the “ oohs” and “ahhs” of the rest of the
wedding assembly, Irene embraced it with her eyes, then
pressing it to her breast she breathed, “Tom, it’s jes’ too
beautiful! Ain’t gwine never be far from dis rose—or you
neither!”
During the lavish reception dinner there in the yard after

the beaming white families had retired to their meal served
within the big house, after Matilda’s third glass of the fine
wine, she burbled to Irene, “You’s mo’n jes’ a pretty
daughter! You’s done saved me from worryin’ if Tom too
shy ever to ax a gal to git married—” Irene loudly and
promptly responded, “He didn’t!” And the guests within
earshot joined them in uproarious laughter.
After the first week back at the Murray place, Tom’s
family soon joked among themselves that ever since the
wedding, his hammer had seemed to start singing against
his anvil. Certainly no one had ever seen him talk so much,
or smile at so many people as often, or work as hard as he
had since Irene came. Her treasured rose of iron graced
the mantelpiece in their new cabin, which he left at dawn
and went out to kindle his forge, whereafter the sounds of
his tools shaping metals seldom went interrupted until that
dusk’s final red-hot object was plunged into the stale water
of his slake tub to hiss and bubble as it cooled. Customers
who came for some minor repair or merely to get a tool
sharpened, he would usually ask if they could wait. Some
slaves liked to sit on foot-high sections of logs off to one
side, though most preferred shifting about in a loose group
exchanging talk of common interest. On the opposite side,
the waiting white customers generally sat on the split-log
benches that Tom had set up for them, positioned carefully
just within his earshot, though far enough away that the
whites didn’t suspect that as Tom worked, he was
monitoring their conversations. Smoking and whittling and
now or then taking nips from their pocket flasks as they
talked, they had come to regard Tom’s shop as a locally
popular meeting place, supplying him now with a daily flow
of small talk and sometimes with fresh, important news that
he told to his Irene, his mother Matilda, and the rest of his
slave-row family after their suppertimes.
Tom told his family what deep bitterness the white men
expressed about northern Abolitionists’ mounting
campaign against slavery. “Dey’s sayin’ dat Pres’dent
Buchanan better keep ’way from dat no-good bunch o’
nigger lovers if he ’speck any backin’ here in de South.” But

his white customers vented their worst hatred, he said,
“’gainst Massa Abraham Lincoln what been talkin’ ’bout
freein’ us slaves—”
“Sho’ is de truth,” said Irene. “Reckon leas’ a year I been
hearin’ how if he don’ shut up, gwine git de Nawth an’ de
South in a war!”
“Y’all ought to of heared my ol’ massa, rantin’ an’
cussin’!” exclaimed Lilly Sue. “He say dis Massa Lincoln
got sich gangly legs an’ arms an’ a long, ugly, hairy face
can’t nobody hardly tell if he look de mos’ like a ape or
gorilla! Say he borned an’ growed up dirt po’ in some log
cabin, an’ cotched bears an’ polecats to git anythin’ to eat,
twixt splittin’ logs into fencerails like a nigger.”
“Tom, ain’t you tol’ us Massa Lincoln a lawyer nowdays?”
asked L’il Kizzy, and Tom affirmatively grunted and
nodded.
“Well, I don’ care what dese white folks says!” declared
Matilda. “Massa Lincoln doin’ good fo’ us if he git dem so
upset. Fact, mo’ I hear ’bout ’im, soun’ to me he like Moses
tryin’ to free us chilluns o’ Israel!”
“Well, he sho’ can’t do it too fas’ to suit me,” said Irene.
Both she and Lilly Sue had been bought by Massa
Murray to increase his field workers, as she dutifully did in
the beginning. But not many months had passed when Irene
asked her doting husband if he would build her a handloom
—and she had one in the shortest time that his skilled
hands could make it. Then the steady frump frump of her
loom could be heard from three cabins away as she
worked into the nights until well beyond the rest of the slaverow family’s bedtime. Before very long the visibly proud
Tom was somewhat self-consciously wearing a shirt that
Irene had cut and sewn from the cloth that she had made
herself. “I jes’ loves doin’ what my mammy teached me,”
she modestly responded to congratulations. She next
carded, spun, wove, and sewed matching ruffled dresses
for an ecstatic Lilly Sue and L’il Kizzy—who now
approaching the age of twenty was demonstrating
absolutely no interest in settling down, seeming to prefer
only successive flirtatious courtships, her newest swain,

Amos, being a general worker at the North Carolina
Railroad Company’s newly completed hotel, ten miles
distant at Company Shops.
Irene then made shirts for each of her brothers-in-law—
which genuinely moved them, even Ashford—and finally
matching aprons, smocks, and bonnets for Matilda and
herself. Nor were Missis and next Massa Murray any less
openly delighted with the amazingly finely stitched dress
and shirt she made for them, from cotton grown right on
their own plantation.
“Why, it’s just beautiful!” Missis Murray exclaimed, turning
around displaying her dress to a beaming Matilda. “I’ll
never figure out why the Holts sold her to us at all, and even
at a reasonable price!” Glibly avoiding the truth that Irene
had confided, Matilda said, “Bes’ I can reckon, Missis, is
dey liked Tom so much.”
Having a great love of colors, Irene avidly collected plants
and leaves that she needed for cloth dyeing, and the
weekends of 1859’s early autumn saw cloth swatches in
red, green, purple, blue, brown, and her favorite yellow
hanging out to dry on the rattan clotheslines. Without
anyone’s formally deciding or even seeming to much notice
it, Irene gradually withdrew from doing further field work.
From the massa and missis on down to Virgil’s and Lilly
Sue’s peculiar-acting four-year-old Uriah, everyone was far
more aware of the increasing ways in which Irene was
contributing a new brightness to all of their lives.
“Reckon good part of what made me want Tom so much
was’cause I seed we both jes’ loves makin’ things fo’ folks,”
she told Matilda, who was rocking comfortably in her chair
before her dully glowing fireplace one chilly late October
evening. After a pause, Irene looked at her mother-in-law in
a sly, under-eyed manner. “Knowin’ Tom,” she said, “ain’t
no need me axin’ if he done tol’ you we’s makin’ sump’n
else—”
It took a second to register. Shrieking happily, springing
up and tightly embracing Irene, Matilda was beside herself
with joy. “Make a l’il gal firs’, honey, so I can hug an’ rock ’er
jes’ like a doll!”

Irene did an incredible range of things across the winter
months as her pregnancy advanced. Her hands seemed all
but able to wreak a magic that soon was being enjoyed
within the big house as well as in every slave-row cabin.
She plaited rugs of cloth scraps; she made both tinted and
scented Christmas-New Year holiday season candles; she
carved dried cow’s horns into pretty combs, and gourds
into water dippers and birds’ nests in fancy designs. She
insisted until Matilda let her take over the weekly chore of
boiling, washing, and ironing everyone’s clothes. She put
some of her fragrant dried-rose leaves or sweet basil
between the folded garments, making the black and white
Murrays alike smell about as fine as they felt.
That February Irene got urged into a three-way
conspiracy by Matilda, who had already enlisted an
amused Ashford’s assistance. After explaining her plan,
Matilda fiercely cautioned, “Don’t’cha breathe nary word to
Tom, you know how stiff an’ proper he is!” Privately seeing
no harm in carrying out her instructions, Irene used her first
chance to draw aside her openly adoring sister-in-law L’il
Kizzy, and speak solemnly: “I’se done heared sump’n I
kinda ’speck you’d want to. Dat Ashford whispin’ it roun’
dat look like some real pretty gal beatin’ yo’ time wid dat
railroad hotel man Amos—” Irene hesitated just enough to
confirm L’il Kizzy’s jealously narrowing eyes, then
continued, “Ashford say de gal right on de same plantation
wid one o’ his’n. He claim Amos go see her some
weeknights, twixt seein’ you Sundays. De gal say fo’ long
she gwine have Amos jumpin’ de broom fo’ sho’—”
L’il Kizzy gulped the bait like a hungry blue catfish, a
report that was immensely gratifying to Matilda, who had
concluded that after her covert observations of her fickle
daughter’s previous swains, Amos seemed the most solid,
sincere prospect for L’il Kizzy to quit flirting and settle down
with.
Irene saw even her stoic Tom raise his brows during the
following Sunday afternoon after Amos arrived on his
borrowed mule for his usual faithful visit. None of the family
ever had seen L’il Kizzy in such a display of effervescing

gaiety, wit, and discreetly suggestive wiles as she
practically showered on the practically tongue-tied Amos,
with whom she had previously acted more or less bored.
After a few more of such Sundays, L’il Kizzy confessed to
her heroine Irene that she finally had fallen in love, which
Irene promptly told the deeply pleased Matilda.
But then when more Sundays had passed without any
mention of jumping the broom, Matilda confided to Irene,
“I’se worried. Knows ain’t gwine be long fo’ dey does
sump’n. You sees how ever’ time he come here, dey goes
walkin’, right ’way from all us, an’ dey heads close togedder
—” Matilda paused, “Irene, I’se worried ’bout two things.
Firs’ thing, dey fool roun’ an’ git too close, de gal liable to
win’ up in a fam’ly way. Other thing, dat boy so used to
railroads an’ folks travelin’, I wonders is dey maybe
figgerin’ to run off to up Nawth? ’Cause L’il Kizzy jes’ wil’
’nough to try anythin’, an’ you know it!”
Upon Amos’ arrival the next Sunday, Matilda promptly
appeared bearing a frosted layer cake and a large jug of
lemonade. In loud, pointed invitation, she exclaimed to
Amos that if she couldn’t cook as well as L’il Kizzy, perhaps
Amos would be willing to suffer through a bit of the cake
and conversation. “Fac’, us don’t never hardly even git to
see you no mo’, seem like!”
An audible groan from L’il Kizzy instantly squelched with
her catching a hard glance from Tom, as Amos, without
much acceptable alternative, took an offered seat. Then as
the family small talk accompanied the refreshments, Amos
contributed a few strained, self-conscious syllables. After a
while, apparently L’il Kizzy decided that her man was much
more interesting than her family was being enabled to
appreciate.
“Amos, how come you don’ tell ’em ’bout dem tall poles
an’ wires dem railroad white folks ain’t long put up?” Her
tone was less a request than a demand.
Fidgeting some, then Amos said, “Well, ain’t rightly know
if’n I can ’zackly ’scribe whatever it is. But jes’ las’ month
dey got through wid stringin’ wires crost de tops o’ real tall
poles stretchin’ fur as you can see—”

“Well, what de poles an’ wires fo’?” Matilda demanded.
“He gittin’ to dat, Mammy!”
Amos looked embarrassed. “Telegraph. B’leeve dat’s
what dey calls it, ma’am. I been an’ looked at how de wires
leads down inside de railroad station where de station
agent got on his desk dis contraption wid a funny kin’ o’
sideways handle. Sometime he makin’ it click wid his
finger. But mo’ times de contraption git to clickin’ by itself. It
mighty ’citin’ to de white folks. Now every mornin’ a goodsize bunch ’em comes an’ ties up dey hosses to jes’ be
roun’ waitin’ fo’ dat thing to git to clickin’. Dey says it’s news
from different places comin’ over dem wires ’way up on
dem poles.”
“Amos, wait a minute, now—” Tom spoke slowly. “You’s
sayin’ it bringin’ news but ain’t no talkin’, jes’ de clickin’?”
“Yassuh, Mr. Tom, like a great big cricket. Seem like to
me somehow or ’nother de station agent be’s gittin’ words
out’n dat,’til it stop. Den pretty soon he step outside an’ tell
dem odder mens what-all was said.”
“Ain’t dese white folks sump’n?” exclaimed Matilda. “De
Lawd do tell!” She beamed upon Amos almost as broadly
as L’il Kizzy was.
Amos, obviously feeling much more at ease than before,
elected now without any promoting to tell them of another
wonder. “Mr. Tom, is you ever been in any dem railroad
repair shops?”
Tom was privately deciding that he liked this young man
who appeared to be, at last, his sister’s choice to jump the
broom with; he had manners. He seemed sincere, solid.
“Naw, son, I ain’t,” Tom said. “Me an’ my wife used to
drive by de Company Shops village, but I ain’t never been
inside none de buildin’s.”
“Well suh, I’se took plenty meals on trays from de hotel to
de mens in all twelve dem different shops, an’ I reckon de
busies’ one de blacksmith shop. Dey be’s doin’ sich in
dere as straightenin’ dem great big train axles what’s got
bent, fixin’ all manners o’ other train troubles, an’ makin’ all
kinds o’ parts dat keeps de trains runnin’. It’s cranes in
dere big as logs, bolted to de ceilin’, an’ de reckon twelve,

fifteen blacksmith’s each got a nigger helper swingin’
mauls an’ sledges bigger’n I ever seen. Dey got forges big
enough to roas’ two, three whole cows in, an’ one dem
nigger helpers tol’ me dey anvils weighs much as eight
hundred pounds!”
“Whew!” whistled Tom, obviously much impressed.
“How much yo’ anvil weigh, Tom?” Irene asked.
“Right roun’ two hundred pounds, an’ ain’t ever’body
could lif’ it.”
“Amos—” L’il Kizzy exclaimed, “you ain’t tol’ ’em nothin’
’bout yo’ new hotel where you works!”
“Hol’ on, none o’ my hotel!” Amos widely grinned. “Sho’
whist it was! Dey takes in money han’ over fis’! Lawd! Well,
’magines y’all knows de hotel ain’t long built. Folks says
some mens pretty hot under de collar ’cause de railroad
president talked wid dem, but den picked Miss Nancy
Hillard to manage it. She de one hired me, memberin’ me
workin’ hard fo’ her fam’ly, growin’ up. Anyhow, de hotel got
thirty rooms, wid six toilets out in de backyard. Folks pays a
dollar a day fo’ room an’ washbowl an’ towel, long wid
breakfas’, dinner, supper, an’ a settin’ chair on de front
porch. Sometime I hears Miss Nancy jes’ acarryin’ on ’bout
how mos’ de railroad workmens leaves her nice clean
white sheets all grease an’ soot-streaked, but den she say
well leas’ dey spends ever’thin’ dey makes, so deys he’pin’
de Company Shops village git better off!”
Again L’il Kizzy cued her Amos: “How ’bout y’all feedin’
dem trainloads o’ folks?”
Amos smiled. “Well, den’s ’bout busy as us ever gits!
See, every day it be’s de two passenger trains, one runnin’
eas’, de odder wes’. Gittin’ to McLeansville or Hillsboro,
’pendin’ which way it gwine, de train’s conductor he
telegraphs ’head to de hotel how many passengers an’
crew he got. An’ by time dat train git to our station, lemme
tell y’all, Miss Nancy’s got all de stuff out on dem long tables
hot an’ steamin’, an’ all us helpers jes’ rarin’ to go to feed
dem folks! I means it be’s quail an’ hams, chickens,
guineas, rabbit, beef; it’s all kinds o’ salads, an’ ’bout any
vegetable you can name,’long wid a whole table nothin’ but

desserts! De peoples piles off dat big ol’ train dat sets
dere waitin’ twenty minutes to give ’em time to eat fo’ dey
gits back on boa’d an’ it commence achuffin’ out an’ gone
again!”
“De drummers, Amos!” cried L’il Kizzy, with everyone
smiling at her pride.
“Yeah,” said Amos. “Dey’s de ones Miss Nancy purely
love to have put up in de hotel! Sometime two, three ’em git
off’n de same train, an’ me an’ ’nother nigger hurries up
carryin’ ’head o’ ’em to de hotel dey suit bag an’ big heavy
black web-strap cases what we knows is full o’ samples
whatever dat ’ticular drummer’s sellin’. Miss Nancy says
dey’s real gen’lmens, keeps deyselves clean as pins, an’
really ’preciates bein’ took good care of, an’ I likes ’em,
too. Some jes’ quick to give you a dime as a nickel fo’
carryin’ dey bags, shinin’ dey shoes, or doin’ nigh ’bout
anythin’! Gin’ly dey washes up an’ walks roun’ town talkin’
wid folks. After eatin’ dinner, dey’ll set on de porch, smokin’
or chawin’ ’baccy an’ jes’ lookin’, or talkin’ til dey goes on
upstairs to bed. Den nex mornin’ after breakfas’, dey calls
one us niggers to tote dey samples cases over crost to dat
blacksmith’s what fo’ a dollar a day rents ’em a hoss an’
buggy, an’ off dey drives to sell stuff at I reckon ’bout all de
stores ’long de roads in dis county—”
In a spontaneity of sheer admiration that Amos worked
amid such wonders, the chubby L’il George exclaimed,
“Amos, boy, I ain’t realized you is leadin’ some life!”
“Miss Nancy say de railroad bigges’ thing since de
hoss,” Amos modestly observed. “She say soon’s some
mo’ railroads gits dey tracks jines togedder, things ain’t
gwine never be de same no mo’.”

CHAPTER 108
Chicken George slowed his galloping, lathered horse
barely enough for its sharp turning off the main road into the
lane, then abruptly his hands jerked the reins taut. It was the
right place, but since he had seen it last: unbelievable!
Beyond the weeds’ choked lane ahead, the once buffcolored Lea home looked a mottled gray of peeling old
paint, rags were stuffed where some window panes had
been; one side of the now heavily patched roof seemed
almost sagging. Even the adjacent fields were barren,
containing nothing but old dried weathered stalks within the
collapsing split-log fences.
Shocked, bewildered, he relaxed the reins to continue
with the horse now picking its way through the weeds. Yet
closer, he saw the big-house porch aslant, the broken-down
front steps; and the slave-row cabins’ roofs were all caving
in. Not a cat, dog, or chicken was to be seen as he slid off
the horse, leading it now by its bridle alongside the house
to the backyard.
He was no more prepared for the sight of the heavy old
woman sitting bent over on a piece of log, picking poke
salad greens, dropping the stems about her feet and the
leaves into a cracked, rusting washbasin. He recognized
that she had to be Miss Malizy, but so incredibly different it
seemed impossible. His unnecessary loud “Whoa!” caught
her attention.
Miss Malizy quit picking the greens. Raising her head,
looking about, then she saw him, but he could tell she didn’t
yet realize who he was.
“Miss Malizy!” He ran over closer, halting uncertainly as
he saw her face still querying. Her eyes squinting, she got
him into better focus... suddenly pushing one hand heavily
down against the log, she helped herself upward.
“George... ain’t’cha dat boy George?”
“Yes’m, Miss Malizyl” He rushed to her now, grasping
and embracing her large flabbiness within his arms, close

to crying. “Lawd, boy, where you been at? Used to be you
was roun’ here all de time!”
Her tone and words held some vacantness, as if she
were unaware of nearly five years’ time lapse. “Been crost
de water in dat Englan’, Miss Malizy. Been fightin’ chickens
over dere—Miss Malizy, where my wife an’ mammy an’
chilluns at?”
So was her face blankness, as if beyond any more
emotion no matter whatever else might happen. “Ain’t
nobody hardly here no mo’, boy!” She sounded surprised
that he didn’t know it. “Dey’s all gone. Jes’ me an’ massa’s
lef ’—”
“Gone where, Miss Malizy?” He knew now that her mind
had weakened.
With a puffy hand she gestured toward the small willow
grove still below the slave row. “Yo’ mammy... Kizzy her
name... layin’ down yonder—”
A whooping sob rose and burst from Chicken George’s
throat. His hand flew up to muffle it.
“Sarah, too, she down dere... an’ ol’ missy... in de front
yard—ain’t you seed ’er when you rid by?”
“Miss Malizy, where ’Tilda an’ my chilluns?”
He didn’t want to rattle her. She had to think a moment.
“’Tilda? Yeh. ’Tilda good gal, sho’ was. Whole lotta
chilluns, too. Yeh. Boy, you oughta knowed massa sol’ off
all ’em long time ago—”
“Where, Miss Malizy, where to?” Rage flooded him.
“Where massa, Miss Malizy?”
Her head turned toward the house. “Up in dere still
’sleep, I reckons. Git so drunk don’ git up ’til late, hollerin’
he want to eat ... ain’t no vittles, hardly... boy, you bring
anything to cook?”
His “No’m” floating back to the confused old lady,
Chicken George burst through the shambles of the kitchen
and down the peeling hallway into the smelly, messy living
room to stop at the foot of the short staircase, bellowing
angrily “Massa Lea!”
He waited briefly.
“MASSA LEA!”

About to go stomping up the stairs, he heard activity
sounds. After a moment, from the right doorway the
disheveled figure emerged, peering downward.
Chicken George through his anger stood shocked to
muteness at the shell of his remembered massa, gaunt,
unshaven, unkempt; obviously he had slept in those clothes.
“Massa Lea?”
“George!” The old man’s body physically jerked.
“George!” He came stumbling down the creaking staircase,
stopping at its foot; they stood staring at each other. In
Massa Lea’s hollowed face, his eyes were rheumy, then
with high, cackling laughter he rushed with widening arms
to hug Chicken George, who sidestepped. Catching Massa
Lea’s bony hands, he shook them vigorously.
“George, so glad you’re back! Where all you been? You
due back here long time ago!”
“Yassuh, yassuh. Lawd Russell jes’ lemme loose. An’ I
been eight days gittin’ here from de ship in Richmon’.”
“Boy, come on in here in the kitchen!” Massa Lea was
tugging Chicken George’s wrists. And when they reached
there, he scraped back the broken table’s two chairs. “Set,
boy! ’LIZY! Where my jug? ’LIZY!”
“Comin’, Massa—” the old woman’s voice came from
outside. “She’s done got addled since you left, don’t know
yesterday from tomorrow,” said Massa Lea.
“Massa, where my fam’ly?”
“Boy, less us have a drink fore we talk! Long as we been
together, we ain’t never had a drink together! So glad you
back here, finally sombody to talk to!”
“Ain’t fo’ talkin’, Massa! Where my fam’ly—”
“’LIZY!”
“Yassuh—” Her bulk moved through the door frame and
she found and put a jug and glasses on the table and then
went back outside as if unaware of Chicken George and
Massa Lea there talking.
“Yeah, boy, I sure am sorry ’bout your mammy. She just
got too old, didn’t suffer much, and she went quick. Put ’er
in a good grave—” Massa Lea was pouring them drinks.
On purpose ain’t mentionin’ ’Tilda an’ de chilluns, it

flashed through Chicken George’s mind. Ain’t changed

none... still tricky an’ dangerous as a snake... got to keep
from gittin’ ’im real mad...
“‘Member de las’ things you said to me, Massa? Said
you be settin’ me free jes’ soon’s I git back. Well, here I is!”
But Massa Lea gave no sign he’d even heard as he
shoved a glass three-quarters filled across the table. Then,
lifting his own, “Here y’are, boy. Le’s drink to you bein’ back
—”
I needs dis... quaffing of the liquor, Chicken George felt it
searing down and warming within him.
He tried again, obliquely. “Sho’ sorry to hear from Miss
Malizy you los’ missis, Massa.”
Finishing his liquor, grunting, Massa Lea said, “She just
didn’t wake up one mornin’. Hated to see her go. She never
give me any peace since that cockfight. But I hated to see
her go. Hate to see anybody go.” He belched. “We all got to
go—”
He ain’t bad off as Miss Malizy, but he ’long de way. He
went now directly to the point.
“My ’Tilda an’ young’uns, Massa, Miss Malizy say you sol’
’em—”
Massa Lea glanced at him. “Yeah, had to, boy. Had to!
Bad luck got me down so bad. Had to sell off near ’bout the
last of my land, everything, hell, even the chickens!”
About to flare, Chicken George got cut off.
“Boy, I’m so po’ now, me an’ Malizy’s eatin’ ’bout what
we can pick an’ catch!” Suddenly he cackled. “Hell, sure
ain’t nothin’ new! I was borned po’!” He got serious again.
“But now you’re back, you and me can get this place agoin’
again, you hear me? I know we can do ’er, boy!”
All that repressed Chicken George from lunging up at
Massa Lea was his lifelong conditioning knowledge of what
would automatically follow physically attacking any white
man. But his rasping anger contained his closeness to it.
“Massa, you sent me ’way from here wid yo’ word to free
me! But I git back, you done even sol’ my fam’ly. I wants my
papers an’ know where my wife and chilluns is, Massa!”
“Thought I tol’ you that! They over in Alamance County,

tobacco planter name Murray, live not far from the railroad
shops—” Massa Lea’s eyes were narrowed. “Don’t you
raise your voice at me, boy!”
Alamance . . . Murray... railroad shops. Inking into
memory those key words, Chicken George now managed
a seeming con-triteness, “I’se sorry, jes’ got excited, sho’
ain’t meant to, Massa—”
The massa’s expression wavered, then forgave. I got to
ease out’n ’im dat piece o’ paper he writ dat free me. “I
been down, boy!” Hunching forward across the table, the
massa squinted fiercely, “You hear me? Nobody never
know how down I been! Ain’t jes’ meanin’ money—” He
gestured at his chest, “Down in here!” He seemed wanting
a response—
“Yassuh.”
“Seen hard days, boy! Them sonsabitches used to holler
my name crossin’ the street when I’m comin’. Heared ’em
laughin’ ’hin’ my back. Sonsabitches!” A bony fist banged
the tabletop. “Swore in my heart Tom Lea show ’em! Now
you back. Git ’nother set of chickens! Don’t care I’m eightythree... we can do ’er, boy!”
“Massa—”
Massa Lea squinted closely, “Forgot how old you now,
boy?”
“Fifty-fo’ now, Massa.”
“You ain’t!”
“Is, too, Massa. Fo’ long, be fifty-five—”
“Hell, I seen you the same mornin’ you birthed! L’il ol’
wrinkled-up straw-colored nigger—” Massa Lea cackled.
“Hell, I give you your name!”
Pouring himself another smaller drink after Chicken
George had waved his hand negatively, quickly Massa Lea
peered around as if to insure that only they were there.
“Reckon ain’t no sense keepin’ you’mongst all them I got
fooled! They think I ain’t got nothin’ no more—” He gave
Chicken George a conspiratorial look. “I got money! Ain’t
much... I got it hid! Don’t nobody but me know where!” He
looked longer at Chicken George. “Boy, when I go, you
know who git what I got? Still ownin’ ten acres, too! Lan’

like money at the bank! Whatever I got go to you! You the
closest I got now, boy.”
He seemed to be wrestling with something. Furtively he
leaned yet closer. “Hell, ain’t no need not to face the fact.
It’s blood ’tween us’, boy!”
He done hit bottom fo’ sho’, sayin’ dot. His insides
contracting, Chicken George sat mutely.
“Jes’ stay on even if a l’il while, George—” The whiskied
face petitioned. “I know you ain’t the kin’ go turnin’ your
back ’gainst them what helped you in this worl’—”

Jes fo’I lef ’ he showed me my freedom paper he’d writ
an’ signed an said he gwine keep in ’is strongbox. Chicken
George realized that he was going to have to get Massa
Lea yet drunker. He studied the face across the table,
thinking bein’ white de only thing he got lef’...
“Massa, never will fo’git how you bring me up—mighty
few white men’s good as dat—”
The watery eyes lighted. “You was jes’ l’il shirttail nigger. I
shore remember—”
“Yassuh, you an’ Uncle Mingo—”
“Ol’ Mingo! Damn his time! Bes’ nigger trainer it was—”
The wavering eyes found a focus on Chicken George “... ’til
you learnt good’... started takin’ you to fights an’ leavin’
Mingo—”
... hope you an’ massa trus’ me to feed de chickens— ”
The memory of old Uncle Mingo’s bitterness hurt even yet.
“’Member, Massa, we was gwine to a big fight in New
Orleans?”
“Shore was! An’ never did make it—” His brow wrinkled.
“Uncle Mingo died jes’ befo’ was how come.”
“Yeah! Ol’ Mingo over under them willow trees now.”

Along with my mammy and Sister Sarah, and Miss Malizy
whenever she go, ’pending which one y’all goes first. He
wondered what either would do without the other.
“Boy, you ’member me givin’ you the travelin’ pass to go
catch all the tail you wanted?”
Making himself simulate guffawing laughter, Chicken
George pounded the tabletop himself, the massa
continuing, “Damn right I did, ’cause you was horny buck if I

ever seen one. An’ we both catched aplenty tail them trips
we made, boy! I knowed you was an’ you knowed I was—”
“Yassuh! Sho’ did, Massa!”
“An’ you commence hackfightin’ an’ I give you money to
bet, an’ you win your ass off!”
“Sho’ did, suh, de truth! De truth!”
“Boy, we was a team, we was!”
Chicken George caught himself almost starting to share
a thrilling in the reminiscings; he also felt a little giddy from
the whiskey. He reminded himself of his objective.
Reaching across the table, taking up the liquor jug, he
poured into his glass about an inch, closing a fist quickly
around the glass to mask the small amount as extending
the bottle across the table, he poured for Massa Lea about
three quarters of a glassful. Raising his glass within his fist,
appearing to lurch, his voice sounded slurring, “Drink to
gooda massa as is anywhere! Like dem Englishmans
says, ’Down de hawtch!’”
Sipping of his, he watched Massa Lea quaff, “Boy, it do
me good you feel thataway—”
“’Nother toas’!” The two glasses elevated. “Fines’ nigger
I ever had!” They drained their glasses.
Wiping his mouth with the back of a veiny hand, coughing
from the whiskey’s impact, Massa Lea also slurred, “You
ain’t tol’ me nothin’ ’bout that Englishman, boy—what’s his
name?”
“Lawd Russell, Massa. He got mo’ money’n he can
count. Got mo’n fo’ hunnud bloodline roosters to pick from
to fight wid—” Then after a purposeful pause, “But ain’t
nowhere de gamecocker you is, Massa.”
“You mean that, boy?”
“Ain’t as smart, one thing. An’ ain’t de man you is! He
jes’ rich an’ lucky. Ain’t yo’ quality o’ white folks, Massa!”
Chicken George thought of having overheard Sir C. Eric
Russell say to friends, “George’s mawster’s a glorified
hackfighter.”
Massa Lea’s head lolled, he jerked it back upward, his
eyes trying to focus on Chicken George. Where would he
keep his strongbox? Chicken George thought how the rest

of his life’s condition would hang upon his obtaining the
vividly remembered square sheet of paper containing
maybe three times more writing than a traveling pass, over
the signature.
“Massa, could I have l’il mo’ yo’ liquor?”
“You know better’n ask, boy... all you wan’—”
“I tol’ amany dem English folks bes’ massa in de worl’s
what I got... ain’t nobody never hear me talkin’ ’bout stayin’
over dere ... hey, yo’ glass gittin’ low, Massa—”
“... Jes’ l’il be ’nough.... naw, you ain’t that kin’, boy...
never give no real trouble...”
“Nawsuh... well, drinkin’ to you ’gin, suh—” They did,
some of the massa’s liquor wetting his chin. Chicken
George, feeling more of the whiskey’s effect, suddenly sat
up straighter, seeing the massa’s head lowering toward the
tabletop... “Y’always good to y’other niggers, too, Massa... ”
The head wavered, stayed down. “Tried to, boy... tried to
—” It was muffled.
B’leeve he good’n drunk now. “Yessuh, you’n missis bofe
—”
“Good woman... lotta ways—”
The massa’s chest now also met the table. Lifting his
chair with minimal sound, Chicken George waited a
suspenseful moment. Moving to the entrance, he halted,
then not overloudly, “Massa!... Massa!”
Suddenly turning, catlike, within seconds he was
searching every drawer within any front-room furniture.
Halting, hearing only his breathing, he hastened up the
steps, cursing their creaking.
The impact of entering a white man’s bedroom hit him.
He stopped... involuntarily stepping backward, he glimpsed
the conglomerate mess. Sobering rapidly, he went back
inside, assaulted by the mingled strong odors of stale
whiskey, urine, sweat, and unwashed clothes among the
emptied bottles. Then as if possessed, he was pulling
open, flinging aside things, searching futilely. Maybe under
the bed. Frantically dropping onto his knees, peering, he
saw the strongbox.
Seizing it, in a trice he was back downstairs, tripping in

the hallway. Seeing the massa still slumped over on the
table, turning, he hastened through the front door. Around at
the side of the house, with his hands he wrested to open
the locked, metal box. Git on de hoss an go—bus’ it open
later. But he had to be sure he had the freedom paper.
The backyard woodchopping block caught his eyes, with
the old ax near it on the ground. Nearly leaping there,
jerking up the ax, setting the box lockside up, with one
smashing blow it burst open. Bills, coins, folded papers
spilled out, and snatching open papers he instantly
recognized it.
“What’cha doin’, boy?”
He nearly jumped from his skin. But it was Miss Malizy
sitting on her log, unperturbed, quietly staring.
“What massa say?” she asked vacantly.
“I got to go, Miss Malizy!”
“Well, reckon you better go ’head, den—”
“Gwine tell ’Tilda an’ de chilluns you wishes ’em well—”
“That be nice, boy... y’all take care—”
“Yes’m—” swiftly moving, he embraced her tightly.
Oughta run see de graves. Then thinking it better to
remember his mammy Kizzy and Sister Sarah as he
remembered them living, Chicken George swept a last look
over the crumbling place where he was born and raised;
unexpectedly blubbering, clutching the freedom paper, he
went running, and vaulting onto his horse ahead of the two
double saddle rolls containing his belongings, he went
galloping back up through the high weeds of the lane, not
looking back.

CHAPTER 109
Near the fencerow that flanked the main road, Irene was
busily picking leaves to press into dry perfumes when she
looked up, hearing the sound of a galloping horse’s hoofs.
She gasped, seeing the horseman wearing a flowing green
scarf and a black derby with a curving rooster tail feather
jutting up from the hatband.
Waving her arms wildly, she raced toward the road,
crying out at the top of her lungs, “Chicken George!
Chicken George!” The rider reined up just beyond the
fence, his lathered horse heaving with relief.
“Do I know you, gal?” he called, returning her smile.
“Nawsuh! We ain’t never seen one ’nother, but Tom,
Mammy,’Tilda, an’ de fam’ly talk ’bout you so much I knows
what you look like.”
He stared at her. “My Tom and ’Tilda?”
“Yassuh! Yo’ wife an’ my husban’—my baby’s daddy!”
It took him a few seconds to register it. “You an’ Tom got
a chile?” She nodded, beaming and patting her protruding
stomach. “It due ’nother month!” He shook his head. “Lawd
God! Lawd God Armghty! What’s yo’ name?”
“Irene, suh!”
Telling him to ride on, she hurried clumsily as fast as she
dared until she reached within vocal range of where Virgil,
Ashford, L’il George, James, Lewis, L’il Kizzy, and Lilly Sue
were planting in another section of the plantation. Her loud
hallooing quickly brought a worried L’il Kizzy, who raced
back to relay the incredible news. They all breathlessly
reached the slave row, shouting and surging about their
father, mother, and Tom, and all trying at once to embrace
him, until a pummeled and disarrayed Chicken George was
entirely overwhelmed with his reception.
“Guess bes’ y’all hears de bad news firs’,” he told them,
and then of the deaths of Gran’mammy Kizzy and Sister
Sarah. “Ol’ Missis Lea, she gone, too—”
When their griefs at their losses had abated somewhat,

he described Miss Malizy’s condition, and then his
experience with Massa Lea, finally resulting in the freedom
paper that he triumphantly displayed. Supper was eaten
and the night fell upon the family grouped raptly about him
as he entered the topic of his nearly five years in England.
“Gwine tell y’all de truth, reckon I’d need ’nother year tryin’
tell all I’se seed an’ done over ’way crost all dat water! My
Lawd!” But he gave them now at least a few highlights of
Sir C. Eric Russell’s great wealth and social prestige; of his
long purebred lineage and consistently winning gameflock,
and how as an expert black trainer from America he had
proved fascinating to lovers of game-cocking in England,
where fine ladies would go strolling leading their small
African boys dressed in silks and velvet by golden chains
about their necks.
“Ain’t gwine lie, I’se glad I had all de ’speriences I is. But
Lawd knows I’se missed y’all sump’n terrible!”
“Sho’ don’ look it to me—stretchin’ two years out to mo’n
fo’!” Matilda snapped.
“Ol’ biddy ain’t changed a bit, is she?” observed Chicken
George to his amused children.
“Hmph! Who so ol’?” Matilda shot back. “Yo’ head done
got to showin’ mo’ gray dan mine is!”
He laughingly patted Matilda’s shoulder as she feigned
great indignance. “T’wan’t me ain’t wanted to git back! I
commence’mindin’ Lawd Russell soon’s dem two years
done. But one day after a while he come an’ say I’se trainin’
his chickens so good, well as de young white feller was my
helper dat he done ’cided sen’ nudder sum o’ money to
Massa Lea, tellin’ ’im he need me one mo’ year—an’ I
nearly had a fit! But what I’m gwine do? Done de bes’ I
could—I got in ’is letter fo’ Massa Lea be sho’ an”splain to
y’all what happen—”
“He ain’t tol’ us nary word!’ exclaimed Matilda, and Tom
spoke.
“You know why? He’d done sol’ us off by dat time.”
“Sho’ right! It’s why us ain’t heared!”
“Umh-huh! Umh-huh! See? T’warn’t me!” Chicken
George sounded pleased to be vindicated.

After his bitter disappointment, he said he had extracted
Sir Russell’s pledge that it would be the last year. “Den I
went ’head an’ he’ped his chickens win dey bigges’ season
ever—leas’ dat’s what he tol’ me. Den fin’ly he said he feel
like I done teached de young white feller ’nough dat he
could take over, an’ I jes’ ’bout lit up dat place carryin’ on, I
was so happy!
“Lemme tell y’all sump’n—it’s a mighty few niggers ever
has two whole carriageloads of English folks ’companyin’
’em like dey did me, to Souf ’hampton. Dat’s great big city
by de water wid ain’t no tellin’ how many ships gwine in an’
out. Lawd Russell had’ranged for me ridin’ steerage in dis
ship crost de ocean.
“Lawd! De scardes’ I ever been! We ain’t got all dat far
out dere fo’ commence to buckin’ an’ rearin’ like a wil’
hoss! Talk ’bout prayin’!”—he ignored Matilda’s
“Hmph!”—“seem like de whole ocean gone crazy, tryin’ to
wrench us to pieces! But den fin’ly it got ca’med down
pretty fair an’ it was even restful by time we come in New
Yawk where ever’body got off—”
“New Yawk!” L’il Kizzy exclaimed. “What’cha do dere,
Pappy?”
“Gal, ain’t I tellin’ it fas’ as I can? Well, Lawd Russell had
give one de ship officers money wid ’structions to put me
on nudder ship dat’d git me to Richmon’. But de ship de
officer made ’rangements wid weren’t leavin’ fo’ five, six
days. So I jes’ walked up an’ down in dat New Yawk,
lissenin’ an’ lookin’—”
“Where you stay at?” asked Matilda.
“Roomin’ house for colored—dat’s same as niggers,
where you think? I had money. I got money, out in my
saddlebags right now. Gwine show it to y’all in de mawnin’.”
He glanced devilishly at Matilda. “Might even give you
hundred dollars, y’act right!” As she snorted, he went on,
“Dat Lawd Russell turnt out to be a real good man. Gimme
dis pretty fair piece o’ money jes’ fo’ I lef ’. Say it strictly fo’
me, not even to mention it to Massa Lea, an’ you knows fo’
sho’ I ain’t.
“Really main thing I done was talked wid plenty dem New

Yawk free niggers. Seem like to me mos’ ’em tryin’ to keep
from starvin’, worse off ’n we is. But it is like we’s heared.
Some of ’em is livin’ good! Got different kinds dey own
businesses, or nice-payin’ jobs. Few owns dey own homes,
an’ more pays rents in sump’n dey calls’partments, an’
some de young’uns gittin’ some schoolin’, sich as dat.
“But whatever nigger I talked to mad as yellowjackets
’bout is all dem ’migratin’ white folks ever’where you looks
—” “Dem Abolitions?” yelped L’il Kizzy. “You tellin’ it or me?
Naw! Sho’ ain’t! Way I unnerstan’, de Abolitions is pret’
much white folks what been in dis country leas’ long as
niggers is. But dese I’se speakin’’bout is pilin’ off ’n ships
into New Yawk, in fact all over de Nawth. Dey’s Irishers,
mainly, you can’t unnerstan’ what dey’s sayin’, an’ lotta
odder ’culiar kinds can’t even speak English. Fact, I heared
dey steps off de ships an firs’ word dey learns is ‘ nagur,’
den next thing deys claimin’ niggers takin’ dey jobs! Dey’s
startin’ fights an’ riots all de time—dey’s wusser’n po’
crackers!”
“Well, Lawd, I hope dey stays ’way from down here!” said
Irene.
“Look here, y’all, it’d take me ’nother week to tell half de
goin’s on I seed an’ heared fo’ dat ship brung me to
Richmon’—”
“S’prise to me you even got on it!”
“Woman, ain’t you gon’ never let me ’lone! Man gone fo’
years an’ you actin’ like I lef’ yestiddy!” The slightest
suggestion of an edge was in Chicken George’s voice.
Tom asked quickly, “You bought yo’ hoss in Richmon’?”
“Dat’s right! Sebenty dollars! She a real fas’ speckle
mare. I figgered free man gwine need a good hoss. I rid ’er
hard as she could stan’ it to Massa Lea’s—”
It being early April, everyone else was extremely busy.
Most of the family were in the planting season’s height.
Among cleaning, cooking, and serving in the big house,
Matilda had very little available free time. Tom’s customers
kept him going at his hardest from daylight into deepening
dusk, and the nearly eight months’ pregnant Irene was
scarely less occupied among her diverse tasks.

No matter, across the next week, Chicken George visited
with them all. But out in the fields, it soon was as
uncomfortably clear to them as to himself that he and
anything connected with field work were alien. Matilda and
Irene’s faces made quick smiles when he came near, then
they made equally quick apologies that they knew he
understood that they had to get back to what they were
doing. Several times, he dropped by to have some chat
with Tom while he blacksmithed. But each time the
atmosphere would grow tense. The slaves who were
waiting grew visibly nervous on seeing whatever as yet
unattended white customers abruptly quit their
conversations, spit emphatically and shift their bodies
about on the log benches, while eyeing the wearer of the
green scarf and the black derby with obvious silent
suspicion.
Twice during these times, Tom happened to glance and
see Massa Murray starting down toward the shop, then turn
back, and Tom knew why. Matilda had said that when the
Murrays first learned of Chicken George’s arrival, “dey
seem happy fo’ us, but Tom, I worries, I knows dey’s since
had dey heads togedder whole lot, den quits talkin’ soon’s I
comes in.”
What was going to be Chicken George’s “free” status
there on the Murray plantation? What was he going to do?
The questions hung like a cloud in the minds of every
individual among them ... excepting Virgil’s and Lilly Sue’s
four-year-old Uriah.
“You’s my gran’pappy?” Uriah seized his chance to say
something directly to the intriguing man who had seemed to
occasion such a stir among all of the other adults ever
since his arrival several days before.
“What?”
The startled Chicken George had just wandered back
into the slave row, deeply rankled by his feeling of being
rejected. He eyed the child who stared at him with large,
curious eyes. “Well, reckon I is.” About to walk on, George
turned. “What dey say yo’ name?”
“Uriah, suh. Gran’pappy, wherebouts you work at?”

“What you talkin’ ’bout?” He glared down at the boy.
“Who tol’ you to ax me dat?”
“Nobody. Jes’ ax you.”
He decided that the boy told the truth. “Don’ work
nowheres. I’se free.”
The boy hesitated. “Gran’pappy, what free is?”
Feeling ridiculous standing there being interrogated by a
young’un, Chicken George started on, but then he thought
of what Matilda had confided of the boy. “Seem like he tend
to be sickly, even maybe a l’il quare in de head. Next time
you roun’ ’im, notice how he apt to jes’ keep starin’ at
somebody even after dey’s quit talkin’.” Turning about,
Chicken George searched the face of Uriah, and he saw
what Matilda meant. The boy did project an impression of
physical weakness and, except for his blinking, the large
eyes were as if they had fastened onto Chicken George,
assessing his every utterance or movement. George felt
uncomfortable. The boy repeated his question. “Suh, what
free is?”
“Free mean ain’t nobody own you no mo’.” He had a
sense that he was speaking to the eyes. He started off
again.
“Mammy say you fights chickens. What you fight ’em
wid?”
Wheeling about, a retort on his tongue, Chicken George
perceived the earnest, curious face of only a small boy. And
it stirred something within him: gran’chile.
Critically he studied Uriah, thinking that there must be
something appropriate to say to him. And finally, “Yo’
mammy or anybody tol’ you where you comes from?”
“Suh? Comes from where?” He had not been told,
Chicken George saw, or if he had, not in a way that he
remembered.
“C’mon ’long wid me here, boy.”
Also, it was something for him to do. Followed by Uriah,
Chicken George led the way over to the cabin that he was
sharing with Matilda. “Now set yo’self down in dat chair an’
don’t be axin’ no whole lotta questions. Jes’ set an’ lissen
to what I tells you.”

“Yassuh.”
“Yo’ pappy born of me an’ yo’ Gran’mammy ’Tilda.” He
eyed the boy. “You unnerstans dat?”
“My pappy y’all young’un.”
“Dat’s right. You ain’t dum’ as you looks. Den my
mammy name Kizzy. So she yo’ great-gran’mammy.
Gran’mammy Kizzy. Say dat.”
“Yassuh. Gran’mammy Kizzy.”
“Yeah. Den her mammy name Bell.”
He looked at the boy.
“Name Bell.”
Chicken George grunted. “Awright. An’ Kizzy’s pappy
name Kunta Kinte—”
“Kunta Kinte.”
“Dat’s right. Well, him an’ Bell yo’ great-great-gran’folks
—”
Nearly an hour later, when Matilda came hurrying
nervously into the cabin, wondering what on earth had
happed to Uriah, she found him dutifully repeating such
sounds as “Kunta Kinte” and “ko” and “Kamby Bolongo.”
And Matilda decided that she had the time to sit down, and
beaming with satisfaction, she listened as Chicken George
told their rapt grandson the story of how his African greatgreat-gran’daddy had said he was not far from his village,
chopping some wood to make a drum, when he had been
surprised, overwhelmed, and stolen into slavery by four
men, “—den a ship brung’im crost de big water to a place
call ’Naplis, an’ he was bought dere by a Massa John
Waller what took ’im to his plantation dat was in
Spotsylvania County, Virginia . . . ”
The following Monday, Chicken George rode with Tom in
the mulecart to buy supplies in the county-seat town of
Graham. Little was said between them, each seeming
mostly immersed in his own thoughts. As they went from
one to another store, Chicken George keenly relished the
quiet dignity with which his twenty-seven-year-old son dealt
with the various white merchants. Then they went into a
feed store that Tom said had recently been bought by a
former county sheriff named J. D. Cates.

The heavy-set Cates was seeming to ignore them as he
moved about serving his few white customers. Some sense
of warning rose within Tom; glancing, he saw Cates looking
covertly at the green-scarfed, black-derbied Chicken
George, who was stepping about in a cocky manner
visually inspecting items of merchandise. Intuitively Tom
was heading toward his father to accomplish a quick exit
when Cates’ voice cut through the store: “Hey, boy, fetch
me a dipper of water from that bucket over there!”
Cates was gazing directly at Tom, the eyes taunting,
menacing. Tom’s insides congealed as, under the threat of
a white man’s direct order, he walked stony-faced to the
bucket and returned with a dipper of water. Cates drank it
at a gulp, his small eyes over the dipper’s rim now on
Chicken George, who stood with his head slowly shaking.
Cates thrust the dipper toward him. “I’m still thirsty!”
Avoiding any quick moves, Chicken George drew from
his pocket his carefully folded freedom paper and handed it
to Cates. Cates unfolded it and read. “What’re you doin’ in
our county?” he asked coldly.
“He my pappy,” Tom put in quickly. Above all, he did not
want his father attempting any defiant talk. “He jes’ been
give his freedom.”
“Livin’ with y’all now over at Mr. Murray’s place?”
“Yassuh.”
Glancing about at his white customers, Cates exclaimed,
“Mr. Murray ought to know the laws of this state better’n
that!”
Uncertain what he meant, neither Tom nor George said
anything.
Suddenly Cates’ manner was almost affable. “Well, when
y’all boys get home, be shore to tell Mr. Murray I’ll be out to
talk with him ’fore long.” With the sound of white men’s
laughter behind them, Tom and Chicken George quickly left
the store.
It was the next afternoon when Cates galloped down the
driveway of the Murray big house. A few minutes later, Tom
glanced up from his forge and saw Irene running toward the
shop. Hurrying past his few waiting customers, he went to

meet her.
“Mammy ’Tilda say let you know massa an’ dat white
man on de porch steady talkin’. Leas’ de man keep talkin’
an’ massa jes’ noddin’ an’ noddin’.”
“Awright, honey,” said Tom. “Don’ be scairt. You git on
back now.” Irene fled.
Then, after about another half hour, she brought word that
Cates had left, “an’ now massa an’ missis got dey heads
togedder.”
But nothing happened until Matilda was serving supper to
Massa and Missis Murray, whom she saw were eating in a
strained silence. Finally, when she brought their dessert
and coffee, Massa Murray said, in a tight voice, “Matilda,
tell your husband I want to see him out on the porch right
away.”
“Yassuh, Massa.”
She found Chicken George with Tom down at the
blacksmith shop. Chicken George forced a laugh when he
got the message. “Reckon he might want to see if I git ’im
some fightin’ roosters!”
Adjusting his scarf and tilting his derby to a jauntier
angle, he walked briskly toward the big house. Massa
Murray was waiting there, seated in a rocker on the porch.
Chicken George stopped in the yard at the foot of the
stairs.
“’Tilda say you wants to see me, suh.”
“Yes, I do, George. I’ll come right to the point. Your family
has brought Missis Murray and me much happiness here
—”
“Yassuh,” George put in, “an’ dey sho’ speaks de highes’
of y’all, too, Massa!”
The massa firmed his voice. “But I’m afraid we’re going
to have to solve a problem—concerning you.” He paused. “I
understand that in Burlington yesterday you met Mr. J. D.
Cates, our former county sheriff—”
“Yassa, reckon could say I met ’im, yassa.”
“Well, you probably know Mr. Cates has visited me
today. He brought to my attention a North Carolina law that
forbids any freed black from staying within the state for

more than sixty days, or he must be re-enslaved.”
It took a moment to sink in. Chicken George stared
disbelievingly at Massa Murray. He couldn’t speak.
“I’m really sorry, boy. I know it don’t seem fair to you.”
“Do it seem fair to you, Massa Murray?”
The massa hesitated. “No, to tell you the truth. But the law
is the law.” He paused. “But if you would want to choose to
stay here, I’ll guarantee you’ll be treated well. You have my
word on that.”
“Yo’ word, Massa Murray?” George’s eyes were
impassive.
That night George and Matilda lay under their quilt, hands
touching, both staring up at the ceiling. “ ’Tilda,” he said
after a long while, “guess ain’t nothin’ to do but stay. Seem
like runnin’s all I ever done.”
“Naw, George.” She shook her head slowly back and
forth. “’Cause you de firs’ one us ever free. You got to stay
free, so us have somebody free in dis family. You jes’ can’t
go back to bein’ a slave!”
Chicken George began to cry. And Matilda was weeping
with him. Two evenings later, she was not feeling well
enough to join him in having supper with Tom and Irene in
their small cabin. The conversation turned to their child,
which was due within two weeks, and Chicken George
grew solemn.
“Be sho’ y’all tells dat chile ’bout our fam’ly, y’all hear
me?”
“Pappy, ain’t none my chilluns gon’ grow up widdout
knowin’.” Tom strained a smile. “I reckon if I don’ tell ’em,
Gran’mammy Kizzy come back to set me straight.”
There was silence for a while as the three of them sat
staring at the fire.
Finally Chicken George spoke again.
“Me an’ ’Tilda was countin’ I got forty more days fo’ I has
to leave, ’cordin’ to what de law say. But I been thinkin’ ain’t
no good time to go. Ain’t no point keep jes’ puttin’ off—”
He sprang up from his chair, fiercely embracing Tom and
Irene. “I be back!” he rasped brokenly. “Take care one
’nother!” He bolted through the door.

CHAPTER 110
It was early in November of 1860, and Tom was hurrying to
finish his last blacksmithing task before darkness fell. He
made it. Then, banking the fire in his forge, he trudged
wearily home to have supper with Irene, who was nursing
their baby girl, Maria, now half a year old. But they ate
wordlessly, because Irene elected not to interrupt his
thoughtful silence. And afterward they joined the rest of the
family crowded into Matilda’s cabin, cracking and shelling
hickory nuts that she and Irene—who was again pregnant—
had been collecting for use in the special cakes and pies
they planned to bake for Christmas and New Year’s.
Tom sat listening to the light conversation without
comment—or even seeming to hear—and then, finally,
during a lull, he leaned forward in his chair and spoke: “Y
’all ’member different times I’se said white mens talkin’
’roun’ my shop done been cussin’ an’ carryin’ on ’bout dat
Massa Lincoln? Well, wish y’all coulda heared’em today,
’cause he been ’lected Pres’dent. Dey claim now he gon’
be up dere in de White House ’gainst de South an’
anybody keepin’ slaves.”
“Well,” said Matilda, “I be primed to hear whatever
Massa Murray got to say ’bout it. He sho’ been steady tellin’
missis gwine be big trouble less’n de North an’ South git
dey differences settled, one way or ’nother.”
“Different things I’ve heared,” Tom went on, “whole lots
mo’ folks dan we thinks is ’gainst slavin’. Ain’t all of ’em up
Nawth, neither. I couldn’t hardly keep my min’ on what I was
doin’ today, I been studyin’ on it so hard. Seem like too
much to b’lieve, but it could come a day won’t be no mo’
slaves.”
“Well, we sho’ won’t live to see it,” said Ashford sourly.
“But maybe she will,” said Virgil, nodding toward Irene’s
baby.
“Don’t seem likely,” said Irene, “much as I like to b’lieve it.
You put together all de slaves in de South, wid even jes’ fiel’

hands bringin’ eight an’ nine hunnud dollars apiece, dat’s
mo’ money’n God’s got! Plus dat, we does all de work.”
She looked at Tom. “You know white folks ain’t gwine give
dat up.”
“Not widdout a fight,” said Ashford. “An’ dey’s lot’s more
dem dan us. So how we gwine win?”
“But if ’n you talkin’ ’bout de whole country,” said Tom, “it
might be jes’ many folks ’gainst slavery as fo’ it.”
“Trouble is dem what’s ’gainst it ain’t here where we is,”
Virgil said, and Ashford nodded, agreeing with someone
for a change.
“Well, if ’n Ashford right ’bout a fight, all dat could change
real fast,” said Tom.
In early December, soon after Massa and Missis Murray
returned home in their buggy from dinner at a neighboring
big house one night, Matilda hurried from the big house to
Tom and Irene’s cabin. “What do ‘seceded’ mean?” she
asked, and when they shrugged their shoulders, she went
on. “Well, massa says dat’s what South Ca’liny jes’ done.
Massa soun’ like it mean dey’s pullin’ out’n de Newnited
States.”
“How dey gon’ pull out de country dey’s in?” Tom said.
“White folks do anythin’,” said Irene.
Tom hadn’t told them, but throughout the day, he had
been listening to his white customers fuming that they would
be “wadin’ knee deep in blood” before they’d give in to the
North on something they called “states’ rights,” along with
the right to own slaves.
“I ain’t wantin’ to scare y’all none,” he told Matilda and
Irene, “but I really b’leeves it gon’ be a war.”
“Oh, my Lawd! Where’bouts it gon’ be, Tom?”
“Mammy, ain’t no special war grounds, like church or
picnic grounds!”
“Well, I sho’ hope don’t be nowhere roun’ here!”
Irene scoffed at them both. “Don’t y’all ax me to b’lieve no
white folks gwine git to killin’ one ’nother over niggers.”
But as the days passed, the things Tom overheard at his
shop convinced him that he was right. Some of it he told his
family about, but some not, for he didn’t want to alarm them

unnecessarily, and he hadn’t decided himself whether he
dreaded the events he saw coming—or hoped for them.
But he could sense the family’s uneasiness increasing
anyway, along with the traffic on the main road, as white
riders and buggies raced back and forth past the plantation
faster and faster and in ever-growing numbers. Almost
every day someone would turn into the driveway and
engage Massa Murray in conversation; Matilda employed
every ruse to mop and dust where she could listen in. And
slowly, over the next few weeks, in the nightly family
exchanges, the white people’s frightened, angry talk
gradually encouraged all of them to dare to believe that if
there was a war—and the “Yankees” won—it was just
possible that they might really be set free.
An increasing number of the blacks who delivered
blacksmithing jobs to Tom told him that their massas and
missies were becoming suspicious and secretive, lowering
their voices and even spelling out words when even their
oldest and closest servants entered a room.
“Is dey actin’ anyways ’culiar in de big house roun’ you,
Mammy?” Tom asked Matilda.
“Not no whisperin’ or spellin’ or sich as dat,” she said.
“But dey sho’ is done commence to shift off sudden to
talkin’ ’bout crops or dinner parties jes’ soon’s I come in.”
“Bes’ thing for us all to do,” said Tom, “is act dumb as we
can, like we ain’t even heard ’bout what gwine on.”
Matilda considered that—but decided against it. And
one evening after she had served the Murrays their
desserts, she came into the dining room and exclaimed,
wringing her hands, “Lawd, Massa an’ Missy, y’all ’scuse
me, jes’ got to say my chilluns an’ me is hearin’ all dis talk
goin’ roun’, an’ we be’s mighty scared o’ dem Yankees, an
we sho’ hopes you gwine take care of us if ’n dey’s trouble.”
With satisfaction, she noted the swift expressions of
approval and relief crossing their faces.
“Well, you’re right to be scared, for those Yankees are
certainly no friends of yours!” said Missis Murray.
“But don’t you worry,” said the massa reassuringly,
“there’s not going to be any trouble.”

Even Tom had to laugh when Matilda described the
scene. And he shared with the family another laugh when
he told them how he had heard that a stablehand in Melville
Township had handled the ticklish matter. Asked by his
massa whose side he’d be on if a war came, the
stablehand had said, “You’s seed two dogs fightin’ over a
bone, Massa? Well, us niggers be’s dat bone.”
Christmas, then New Year’s came and went with hardly
any thought of festivity throughout Alamance County. Every
few days Tom’s customers would arrive with news of
secessions by still more among the southern states—first
Mississippi, then Florida, Alabama, Georgia, and
Louisiana, all during the month of January 1861, and on the
first day of February, Texas. And all of them proceeded to
join a “Confederacy” of southern states headed by their
own President, a man named Jefferson Davis.
“Dat Massa Davis an’ whole passels of other southern
senators, congressmens, an’ high mens in de Army,” Tom
reported to the family, “is resignin’ to come on back home.”
“Tom, it’s done got closer’n dat to us,” exclaimed
Matilda. “A man come today an’ tol’ massa dat Ol’ Jedge
Ruffin leavin’ Haw River tomorrow to ’tend a big peace
conference in dat Washington, D.C.!”
But a few days later, Tom heard his blacksmithing
customers saying that Judge Ruffin had returned sadly
reporting the peace conference a failure, ending in
explosive arguments between the younger delegates from
the North and the South. A black buggy driver then told Tom
that he had learned firsthand from the Alamance County
courthouse janitor that a mass meeting of nearly fourteen
hundred local white men had been held—with Massa
Murray among them, Tom knew—and that Massa Holt,
Irene’s former owner, and others as important, had shouted
that war must be averted and pounded tables calling
anyone who would join the Confederates “traitors.” The
janitor also told him that a Massa Giles Mebane was
elected to take to a state secession convention the four-toone vote in Alamance County to remain within the Union.
It became hard for the family to keep up with all that was

reported each night either by Tom or Matilda. On a single
day in March, news came that President Lincoln had been
sworn in, that a Confederate flag had been unveiled at a
huge ceremony in Montgomery, Alabama, and that the
Confederacy’s President, Jeff Davis, had declared the
African slave trade abolished; feeling as they knew he did
about slavery, the family couldn’t understand why. Only days
later, tension rose to a fever pitch with the announcement
that the North Carolina legislature had called for an
immediate twenty thousand military volunteers.
Early on the Friday morning of April 12, 1861, Massa
Murray had driven off to a meeting in the town of Mebane,
and Lewis, James, Ashford, L’il Kizzy, and Mary were out in
the field busily transplanting young tobacco shoots when
they began to notice an unusually large number of white
riders passing along the main road at full gallop. When one
rider briefly slowed, angrily shaking his fist in their direction
and shouting at them something they couldn’t understand,
Virgil sent L’il Kizzy racing from the field to tell Tom,
Matilda, and Irene that something big must have happened.
The usually calm Tom lost his temper when Kizzy could
tell him no more than she did. “Shouted what at y’all?” he
demanded. But she could only repeat that the horseman
had been too far away for them to hear clearly.
“I better take de mule an’ go fin’ out!” Tom said.
“But you ain’t got a travelin’ pass!” shouted Virgil as he
went riding down the driveway.
“Got to take dat chance!” Tom shouted back.
By the time he reached the main road, it was starting to
resemble a racetrack, and he knew that the riders must be
headed for Company Shops, where the telegraph office
received important news over wires strung high atop poles.
As they raced along, some of the horsemen were
exchanging shouts with each other, but they didn’t seem to
know much more than he did. As he passed poor whites
and blacks running on foot, Tom knew the worst had
happened, but his heart clenched anyway when he reached
the railroad repair yard settlement and saw the great,
jostling crowd around the telegraph office.

Leaping to the ground and tethering his mule, he ran in a
wide circle around the edge of the mob of angrily gesturing
white men who kept glancing up at the telegraph wires as if
they expected to see something coming over the wires. Off
to one side, he reached a cluster of blacks and heard what
they were jabbering: “Massa Linkum sho’ gon’ fight over us
now!” . . . “Look like de Lawd care sump’n ’bout niggers
after all!” . . . “Jes’ can’t b’lieve it!” ... “Free, Lawd, free!”
Drawing one old man aside, Tom learned what had
happened. South Carolina troops were firing on the federal
Fort Sumter in Charleston Harbor, and twenty-nine other
federal bases in the South had been seized on the orders
of President Davis. The war had actually begun. Even after
Tom returned home with the news—arriving safely before
the massa got home—the black grapevine was almost
choked with bulletins for weeks. After two days of siege,
they learned, Fort Sumter had surrendered with fifteen
dead on both sides, and over a thousand slaves were
sandbagging the entrances to Charleston Harbor. After
informing President Lincoln that he would get no North
Carolina troops, North Carolina Governor John Ellis had
pledged thousands with muskets to the Confederate Army.
President Davis asked all southern white men between
eighteen and thirty-five to volunteer to fight for up to three
years, and ordered that of each ten male slaves on any
plantation, one should be turned over for unpaid war labor.
General Robert E. Lee resigned from the Army of the
United States to command the Army of Virginia. And it was
claimed that every government building in Washington,
D.C., was thick with armed soldiers and iron and cement
barricades in fear of southern invasion forces.
White men throughout Alamance County, meanwhile,
were lining up by the scores to sign up and fight. Tom heard
from a black wagon-driver that his massa had called in his
most trusted big-house servant and told him, “Now, boy, I’m
expectin’ you to look out after missis and the children till I
get back, you hear?” And a number of neighboring whites
dropped in to shoe up their horses before assembling at
Mebane Township with the rest of the newly formed

“Hawfields Company” of Alamance County to board the
train that waited to take them to a training camp at
Charlotte. A black buggy-driver who had taken his massa
and his missy there to see off their eldest son described
the scene for Tom: the womenfolk bitterly weeping, their
boys leaning from the train’s windows, making the air ring
with rebel yells, many of them shouting “Goin’ to ship those
sonsabitchin’ Yankees an’ be back’fore breakfast!” “Young
massa,” said the buggy-driver, “had on his new gray
uniform, an’ he was a-cryin’ jes’ hard as ol’ massa and
missy was, an’ dey commence to kissin’ and huggin’ till dey
finally jes’ kind o’ broke apart from one ’nother, jes’ standin’
in de road clearin’ dey throats an’ sniflin’. Ain’t no need me
telling no lie, I was acryin’, too!”

CHAPTER 111
Within their lamplit cabin late that night, now for a second
time Tom sat by the bed with Irene convulsively gripping his
hand and when abruptly her moans of suffering in labor
advanced to a piercing scream, he went bolting outside to
get his mother. But despite the hour, intuitively Matilda had
not been asleep and also had heard the scream. He met
her already rushing from her cabin, shouting back over her
shoulder at a bug-eyed L’il Kizzy and Mary. “Bile some
kittles o’ water an’ git it to me quick!” Within the next few
moments, the other adults of the family had also popped
from their cabins, and Tom’s five brothers joined his
nervous pacing and wincing while the sounds of Irene’s
anguish continued. In the first streaks of dawn when an
infant’s shrill cry was heard, Tom’s brothers converged
upon him, pounding his back, wringing his hands—even
Ashford—then in a little while a grinning Matilda stepped
through the cabin door, exclaiming, “Tom, y’all got anudder
l’il ol’ gal!”
After a while there in the brightening morning, first Tom,
then the rest of the family became a procession trooping in
to see the wan but smiling Irene and the crinkly faced brown
infant. Matilda had taken the news into the big house,
where she hurriedly cooked breakfast, and right after
Massa and Missis Murray finished eating, they also came
to the slave row to see with delight the new infant born into
their ownership. Tom readily agreed to Irene’s wish to
name this second daughter “Ellen,” after Irene’s mother. He
was so jubilant that he had become a father again that he
didn’t remember until later how much he had wanted a boy.
Matilda waited until the next afternoon to drop by the
blacksmithing shop. “Now, Tom, you know what I’m thinkin’
’bout?” she asked. Smiling at her, Tom said, “You late,
Mammy. I done already tol’ eve’ybody—an’ was fixin’ to tell
you—to come squeeze in de cabin dis comin’ Sadday
night an’ I’se gwine tell dis chile de fam’ly story jes’ like I

done wid Maria, when she born.” As planned, the family did
gather, and Tom continued the tradition that had been
passed down from the late Gran’mammy Kizzy and
Chicken George, and there was much joking afterward that
if ever anyone among them should neglect to relate the
family chronicle to any new infant, they could surely expect
to hear from the ghost of Gran’mammy Kizzy.
But even the excitement of Tom and Irene’s second child
soon diminished as a war’s swiftly paced events gained
momentum. As Tom busily shod horses and mules and
made and repaired tools, he kept his ears strained to hear
every possible scrap of the exchanges of talk among the
white customers gathered before his shop, and he winced
with disappointment at their successive jubilant reports of
Confederate triumphs. Particularly a battle the white men
called “Bull Run” had set the white customers hollering,
beating each others’ backs and throwing their hats into the
air as they shouted such things as “What Yankees wasn’t
left dead or hurt run for their lives!” or “Soon’s Yankees
hears our boys comin’, they shows they asses!” The
jubilance was repeated over a big Yankee loss at a
“Wilson’s Creek” in Missouri, then not long after when at a
“Ball’s Bluff ” in Virginia, hundreds of Yankees were left
dead, including a bullet-riddled general who had been a
close personal friend of President Lincoln. “Dem white
mens was all jumpin’ up an’ down an’ laughin’ dat Pres’dent
Lincoln heared it an’ commence to cryin’ like a baby,” Tom
told his somber family. By the end of 1861—when
Alamance County had sent twelve companies off into the
various fighting—he hated to report more than a little of
what he was continuing to hear, for it only deepened his
family’s gloom, along with his own. “Lawd knows sho’ don’t
soun’ like we’s gwine git free, keep gwine like dis!” said
Matilda, glancing about one late Sunday afternoon’s
semicircle of downcast faces. No one made any comment
for a long while; then Lilly Sue said, as she nursed her
sickly son Uriah, “All dat freedom talk! I done jes’ give up
any mo’ hope!”
Then a spring 1862 afternoon, when a rider came

cantering down the Murray driveway, wearing the
Confederate officer’s gray uniform, even from some
distance he seemed vaguely familiar to Tom. As the rider
drew nearer, with a shock Tom realized that it was the
former County Sheriff Cates, the feed-store owner, whose
counsel to Massa Murray had forced Chicken George to
leave the state. With growing apprehension, Tom saw
Cates dismount and disappear within the big house; then
before long Matilda came hurrying to the blacksmith shop,
her brows furrowed with worry. “Massa want you, Tom. He
talkin’ wid dat no-good feed-store Massa Cates. What you
reckon dey wants?”
Tom’s mind had been racing with possibilities, including
having heard his customers saying that many planters had
taken slaves to battles with them, and others had
volunteered the war services of their slaves who knew
trades, especially such as carpentry, leather-working, and
blacksmithing. But he said as calmly as he could, “Jes’ don’
know, Mammy. I go find out is de bes’ thing, I reckon.”
Composing himself, Tom walked heavily toward the big
house.
Massa Murray said, “Tom, you know Major Cates.”
“Yassuh.” Tom did not look at Cates, whose gaze he
could feel upon him.
“Major Cates tells me he’s commanding a new cavalry
unit being trained at Company Shops, and they need you to
do their horseshoeing.”
Tom swallowed. He heard his words come with a hollow
sound. “Massa, dat mean I go to de war?”
It was Cates who scornfully answered. “No niggers will go
anywhere I’m fighting, to fly if they as much as hear a bullet!
We just need you to shoe horses where we’re training.”
Tom gulped his relief. “Yassuh.”
“The major and I have discussed it,” said Massa Murray.
“You’ll work a week for his cavalry, then a week here for me,
for the duration of the war, which it looks like won’t be long.”
Massa Murray looked at Major Cates. “When would you
want him to start?”
“Tomorrow morning, if that’s all right, Mr. Murray.”

“Why, certainly, it’s our duty for the South!” said Massa
Murray briskly, seeming pleased at his chance to help the
war effort.
“I hope the nigger understands his place,” said Cates.
“The military is no soft plantation.”
“Tom knows how to conduct himself, I’m sure.” Massa
Murray looked his confidence at Tom. “Tonight I’ll write out
a traveling pass and let Tom take one of my mules and
report to you tomorrow morning.”
“That’s fine!” Cates said, then he glanced at Tom. “We’ve
got horseshoes, but you bring your tools, and I’ll tell you now
we want good, quick work. We’ve got no time to waste!”
“Yassuh.”
Carrying a hastily assembled portable horseshoeing kit
on the mule’s back, when Tom approached the railroad
repair settlement at Company Shops, he saw the previously
lightly wooded surrounding acres now dotted with long,
orderly rows of small tents. Closer, he heard bugles
sounding and the flat cracking of muskets being fired; then
he tensed when he saw a mounted guard galloping toward
him. “Don’t you see this is the Army, nigger? Where do you
think you’re headed?” the soldier demanded.
“Major Cates done tol’ me come here an’ shoe hosses,”
Tom said nervously.
“Well, the cavalry’s over yonder—” the guard pointed.
“Git! Before you git shot!”
Booting the mule away, Tom soon came over a small
rise and saw four lines of horsemen executing maneuvers
and formations, and behind the officers who were shouting
orders, he distinguished Major Cates wheeling and
prancing on his horse. He was aware when the major saw
him there on the mule and made a gesture, whereupon
another mounted soldier came galloping in his direction.
Tom reined up and waited.
“You the blacksmith nigger?”
“Yassuh.”
The guard pointed toward a small cluster of tents. “You’ll
stay and work down by those garbage tents. Soon as you
get set up, we’ll be sending horses.”

The horses in dire need of new metal shoes came in an
unending procession across Tom’s first week of serving the
Confederate cavalry, and from first dawn until darkness fell,
he shod them until the underside of hooves seemed to
become a blur in his mind. Everything he overheard the
young cavalrymen say made it sound even more certain
that the Yankees were being routed in every battle, and it
was a weary, disconsolate Tom who returned home to
spend a week serving the regular customers for Massa
Murray.
He found the women of slave row in a great state of
upset. Through the previous full night and morning, Lilly
Sue’s sickly son Uriah had been thought lost. Only shortly
before Tom’s return Matilda, while sweeping the front
porch, had heard strange noises, and investigating she had
found the tearful, hungry boy hiding under the big house. “I
was jes’ tryin’ to hear what massa an’ missy was sayin’
’bout freein’ us niggers, but under dere I couldn’t hear
nothin’ atall,” Uriah had said, and now both Matilda and
Irene were busily trying to comfort the embarrassed and
distraught Lilly Sue, whose always strange child had
caused such a commotion. Tom helped to calm her, then
described to the family his own week’s experience. “Ain’t
hardly nothin’ I seed or heared make it look no better,” he
concluded. Irene tried a futile effort to make them all feel at
least a little better. “Ain’t never been free, so ain’t gwine
miss it nohow,” she said. But Matilda said, “Tell y’all de
truth, I’se jes’ plain scairt somehow us gwine wind up worse
off ’n we was befo’.”
The same sense of foreboding pervaded Tom as he
began his second week of horseshoeing for the
Confederate cavalry. During the third night, as he lay
awake, thinking, he heard a noise that seemed to be
coming from one of the adjoining garbage tents. Nervously
Tom groped, and his fingers grasped his blacksmithing
hammer. He tipped out into the faint moonlight to
investigate. He was about to conclude that he had heard
some foraging small animal when he glimpsed the
shadowy human figure backing from the garbage tent

starting to eat something in his hands. Tipping closer, Tom
completely surprised a thin, sallow-faced white youth. In the
moonlight for a second, they stared at each other, before
the white youth went bolting away. But not ten yards distant,
the fleeing figure stumbled over something that made a
great clatter as he recovered himself and disappeared into
the night. Then armed guards who came rushing with
muskets and lanterns saw Tom standing there holding his
hammer.
“What you stealin’, nigger?
Tom sensed instantly the trouble he was in. To directly
deny the accusation would call a white man a liar—even
more dangerous than stealing. Tom all but babbled in his
urgency of knowing that he had to make them believe him.
“Heared sump’n an’ come lookin’ an’ seed a white man in
de garbage, Massa, an’ he broke an’ run.”
Exchanging incredulous expressions, the two guards
broke into scornful laughter. “ We look that dumb to you,
nigger?” demanded one. “Major Cates said keep special
eye on you! You’re going to meet him soon’s he wakes up
in the morning, boy!” Keeping their gazes fixed on Tom, the
guards held a whispered consultation.
The second guard said, “Boy, drop that hammer!” Tom’s
fist instinctively clenched the hammer’s handle. Advancing
a step, the guard leveled his musket at Tom’s belly. “Drop
it!”
Tom’s fingers loosed and he heard the hammer thud
against the ground. The guards motioned him to march
ahead of them for quite a distance before commanding him
to stop in a small clearing before a large tent where another
armed guard stood. “We’re on patrol an’ caught this nigger
stealin’,” said one of the first two and nodded toward the
large tent. “We’d of took care of him, but the major told us
to watch him an’ report anything to him personal. We’ll
come back time the major gets up.”
The two guards left Tom being scowled at by the new
one, who rasped, “Lay down flat on your back, nigger. If you
move you’re dead.” Tom lay down as directed. The ground
was cold. He speculated on what might happen, pondered

his chances of escape, then the consequences if he did.
He watched the dawn come, then the first two guards
returned as noises within the tent said that Major Cates had
risen. One of the guards called out, “Permission to see you,
Major?”
“What about?” Tom heard the voice growl from within.
“Last night caught that blacksmith nigger stealing, sir!”
There was a pause. “Where is he now?”
“Prisoner right outside, sir!”
“Coming right out!”
After another minute, the tent flap opened and Major
Cates stepped outside and stood eyeing Tom as a cat
would a bird. “Well, highfalutin’ nigger, tell me you been
stealin’! You know how we feel about that in the Army?”
“Massa—” Passionately Tom told the truth of what had
happened, ending, “He was mighty hungry, Massa,
rummagin’ in de garbage.”
“Now you got a white man eating garbage! You forget
we’ve met before, plus I know your kind, nigger! Took care
of that no-good free nigger pappy of yours, but you slipped
loose. Well, this time I got you under the rules of war.”
With incredulous eyes, Tom saw Cates go striding to
snatch a horsewhip hanging from the pommel of his saddle
atop a nearby post. Tom’s eyes darted, weighing escape,
but all three guards leveled their muskets at him as Cates
advanced; his face contorted, raising the braided whip, he
brought it down lashing like fire across Tom’s shoulders,
again, again . . .
When Tom went stumbling back in humiliation and fury to
where he had been shoeing the horses, uncaring what
might happen if he was challenged, he seized his kit of
tools, sprang onto his mule, and did not stop until he
reached the big house. Massa Murray listened to what had
happened, and he was reddened with anger as Tom
finished, “Don’t care what, Massa, I ain’t gwine back.”
“You all right now, Tom?”
“I ain’t hurt none, ’cept in my mind, if dat’s what you
means, suh.”
“Well, I’m going to give you my word. If the major shows

up wanting trouble, I’m prepared to go to his commanding
general, if necessary. I’m truly sorry this has happened. Just
go back out to the shop and do your work.” Massa Murray
hesitated. “Tom, I know you’re not the oldest, but Missis
Murray and I regard you as the head of your family. And we
want you to tell them that we look forward to us all enjoying
the rest of our lives together just as soon as we get these
Yankees whipped. They’re nothing but human devils!”
“Yassuh,” Tom said. He thought that it was impossible for
a massa to perceive that being owned by anyone could
never be enjoyable. As the weeks advanced into the spring
of 1862, Irene again became pregnant, and the news that
Tom heard daily from the local white men who were his
customers gave him a feeling that Alamance County
seemed within the quiet center of a hurricane of war being
fought in other places. He heard of a Battle of Shiloh where
Yankees and Confederates had killed or injured nearly forty
thousand apiece of each other, until survivors had to pick
their way among the dead, and so many wounded needed
amputations that a huge pile of severed human limbs grew
in the yard of the nearest Mississippi hospital. That one
sounded like a draw, but there seemed no question that the
Yankees were losing most of the major battles. Near the
end of August Tom heard jubilant descriptions of how in a
second Battle of Bull Run, the Yankees had retreated with
two generals among their dead, and thousands of their
troops straggling back into Washington, D.C., where
civilians were said to be fleeing in panic as clerks
barricaded federal buildings, and both the Treasury’s and
the banks’ money was being shipped to New York City
while a gunboat lay under steam in the Potomac River,
ready to evacuate President Lincoln and his staff. Then at
Harpers Ferry hardly two weeks later, a Confederate force
under General Stonewall Jackson took eleven thousand
Yankee prisoners.
“Tom, I jes’ don’ want to hear no mo’ ’bout dis terrible
war,” said Irene one evening in September as they sat
staring into their fireplace after he had told her of two threemile-long rows of Confederate and Yankee soldiers having

faced and killed each other at a place called Antietam. “I
sets here wid my belly full of our third young’un, an’ it
somehow jes’ don’ seem right dat all us ever talks’bout any
mo’ is jes’ fightin’ an’ killin’—”
Simultaneously then they both glanced behind them at
the cabin door, having heard a sound so slight that neither
of them paid it any further attention. But when the sound
came again, now clearly a faint knock, Irene, who sat
closer, got up and opened the door, and Tom’s brow raised
hearing a white man’s pleading voice. “Begging pardon.
You got anything I can eat? I’m hungry.” Turning about, Tom
all but fell from his chair, recognizing the face of the white
youth he had surprised among the garbage cans at the
cavalry post. Quickly controlling himself, suspicious of
some trick, Tom sat rigidly, hearing his unsuspecting wife
say, “Well, we ain’t got nothin’ but some cold cornbread left
from supper.”
“Sho’ would ’preciate that, I ain’t hardly et in two days.”
Deciding that it was only bizarre coincidence, Tom now
rose from his chair and moved to the door. “Been doin’ a l’il
mo’n jes’ beggin’, ain’t you?”
For half a moment the youth stared quizzically at Tom,
then his eyes flew wide; he disappeared so fast that Irene
stood astounded—and she was even more so when Tom
told her whom she had been about to feed.
The whole of slave row became aware of the incredible
occurrence on the next night when—with both Tom and
Irene among the family gathering—Matilda mentioned that
just after breakfast, “some scrawny po’ white boy” had
suddenly appeared at the kitchen screen door piteously
begging for food; she had given him a bowl of leftover cold
stew for which he had thanked her profusely before
disappearing, then later she had found the cleaned bowl
sitting on the kitchen steps. After Tom explained who the
youth was, he said, “Since you feedin’ ’im, I ’speck he still
hangin’ roun’. Probably jes’ sleepin’ somewhere out in de
woods. I don’ trust him nohow; first thing we know,
somebody be in trouble.”
“Ain’t it de truth!” exclaimed Matilda. “Well, I tell you one

thing, if he show me his face ag’in, I gwine ax him to wait
an’ let’im b’leeve I’se fixin’ ’im sump’n while I goes an’ tells
massa.”
The trap was sprung perfectly when the youth
reappeared the following morning. Alerted by Matilda,
Massa Murray hurried through the front door and around the
side of the house as Matilda hastened back to the kitchen
in time to overhear the waiting youth caught by total
surprise. “What are you hanging around here for?”
demanded Massa Murray. But the youth neither panicked
nor even seemed flustered. “Mister, I’m just wore out from
travelin’ an’ stayin’ hungry. You can’t hold that ’gainst no
man, an’ your niggers been good enough to feed me
something.” Massa Murray hesitated, then said, “Well, I can
sympathize, but you ought to know how hard the times are
now, so we can’t be feeding extra mouths. You just have to
move on.” Then Matilda heard the youth’s voice abjectly
pleading, “Mister, please let me stay. I ain’t scared of no
work. I just don’t want to starve. I’ll do any work you got.”
Massa Murray said, “There’s nothing for you here to do.
My niggers work the fields.”
“I was born and raised in the fields. I’ll work harder’n your
niggers, Mister—to just eat regular,” the youth insisted.
“What’s your name and where you come here from,
boy?”
“George Johnson. From South Carolina, sir. The war
pretty near tore up where I lived. I tried to join up but they
said I’m too young. I’m just turned sixteen. War ruint our
crops an’ everything so bad, look like even no rabbits left.
An’ I left, too, figgered somewhere—anywhere else—had
to be better. But seem like the only somebody even give
me the time of day been your niggers.”
Matilda could sense that the youth’s story had moved
Massa Murray. Incredulously then she heard, “Would you
know anything at all about being an overseer?”
“Ain’t never tried that.” The George Johnson youth
sounded startled. Then he added hesitantly, “But I told you
ain’t nothin’ I won’t try.”
Matilda eased yet closer to the edge of the screen door

to hear better in her horror.
“I’ve always liked the idea of an overseer, even though
my niggers do a good job raising my crops. I’d be willing to
try you out for just bed and board to start—to see how it
works out.”
“Mister—sir, what’s your name?”
“Murray,” the massa said.
“Well, you got yourself an overseer, Mr. Murray.”
Matilda heard the massa chuckle. He said, “There’s an
empty shed over behind the barn you can move into.
Where’s your stuff?”
“Sir, all the stuff I’ve got, I’ve got on,” said George
Johnson.
The shocking news spread through the family with a
thunder-bolt’s force. “Jes’ couldn’t b’leeve what I was
hearin’!” exclaimed Matilda, ending her incredible report,
and the family’s members fairly exploded. “Massa mus’ be
goin’ crazy!” . . . “Ain’t we run his place fine ourselves?” . . .
“Jes’ ’cause dey both white, dat’s all!”. . . “’speck he gwine
see dat po’ cracker different time we sees to it’nough
things go wrong!”
But as furious as they were, from their first direct
confrontation with the impostor out in the field on the
following morning, he immediately made it difficult for their
anger to remain at a fever pitch. Already out in the field
when they arrived led by Virgil, the scrawny, sallow George
Johnson came walking to meet them. His thin face was
reddened and his Adam’s apple bobbed as he said, “I
can’t blame y’all none for hatin’ me, but I can ask y’all to
wait a little to see if I turn out bad as y’all think. You the first
niggers I ever had anything to do with, but seem like to me
y’all got black same as I got white, an’ I judge anybody by
how they act. I know one thing, y’all fed me when I was
hungry, and it was plenty of white folks hadn’t. Now seem
like Mr. Murray got his mind set on having a overseer, and I
know y’all could help him git rid of me, but I figger you do
that, you be takin’ your chances the next one he git might be
a whole lot worse.”
None of the family seemed to know what to say in

response. There seemed nothing to do except filter away
and set to work, all of them covertly observing George
Johnson proceeding to work as hard as they, if not harder
—in fact, he seemed obsessed to prove his sincerity.
Tom’s and Irene’s third daughter—Viney—was born at
the end of the newcomer’s first week. By now out in the
field, George Johnson boldly sat down with the members of
the family at lunchtimes, appearing not to notice how
Ashford conspicuously got up, scowling, and moved
elsewhere. “Y ’all see I don’t know nothin’ ’bout overseein’,
so y’all needs to help me along,” George Johnson told them
frankly. “It would be no good for Mr. Murray to come out
here an’ figger I ain’t doin’ the job like he want.”
The idea of training their overseer amused even the
usually solemn Tom when it was discussed in the slave row
that night, and all agreed that the responsibility naturally
belonged to Virgil, since he had always run the field work.
“First thing,” he said to George Johnson, “you gon’ have to
change whole lot o’ yo’ ways. ’Cose, wid all us lookin’ all de
time, massa ain’t likely to git close fo’ us can give you a
signal. Den you have to hurry up an’ git ’way from too close
roun’ us. Reckon you knows white folks an’ ’specially
oberseers ain’t s’posed to seem like deys close wid
niggers.”
“Well, in South Carolina where I come from, seem like
the niggers never got too close to white folks,” George
Johnson said.
“Well, dem niggers is smart!” said Virgil. “De nex’ thing,
a massa want to feel like his oberseer makin’ his niggers
work harder’n dey did befo’ de oberseer come. You got to
learn how to holler, ‘Git to work, you niggers!’ an’ sich as
dat. An’ anytime you’s roun’ massa or any mo’ white folks,
don’ never call us by our names de way you does. You got
to learn how to growl an’ cuss an’ soun’ real mean, to make
massa feel like you ain’t too easy an’ got us goin’.”
When Massa Murray did next visit his fields, George
Johnson made strong efforts, hollering, cursing, even
threatening everyone in the field, from Virgil down. “Well,
how they doing?” asked Massa Murray. “Pretty fair for

niggers been on their own,” George Johnson drawled, “but I
’speck another week or two ought to git’em shaped up
awright.”
The family rocked with laughter that night, imitating
George Johnson, along with Massa Murray’s evident
pleasure. Afterward when the mirth had waned, George
Johnson quietly told them how it had been to be dirt-poor
for all of his earlier life, even before his family had been
routed with their fields ruined by the war, until he had sought
some new, better life. “He ’bout de only white man we ever
gwine meet dat’s jes’ plain honest ’bout hisself,” Virgil
expressed their collective appraisal.
“I tell de truth, I ’joys listenin’ to ’im talk,” said Lilly Sue,
and L’il George scoffed, “He talk like any other cracker.
What make him different he de firs’ one I ever seen ain’t try
to act like sump’n he wasn’t. De mos’ is so shame of what
dey is.” Mary laughed. “Well, dis one ain’t shame, not long
as he keep eatin’ de way he is.”
“Soun’ like to me y’all done really taken a likenin’ to Ol’
George,” said Matilda. More laughter rose at their
homemade overseer’s new nickname, “Ol’ George,” since
he was so ridiculously young. And Matilda was correct:
Incredibly enough, they had come to like him genuinely.

CHAPTER 112
The North and the South seemed locked together like
stags in mortal combat. Neither seemed able to mount a
successful campaign to put the other away. Tom began to
notice some despondency in his customers’ conversations.
It was a buoy to the hope yet strong in him for freedom.
The family plunged into intense speculation when Ol’
George Johnson said mysteriously, “Mr. Murray done said I
could go ’tend to some business. I be back jes’ quick as I
can.” Then the next morning he was gone.
“What you reckon it is?”
“Way he always talked, wasn’t nothin’ lef’ to take care of
where he come from.”
“Maybe sump’n to do wid his folks—”
“But he ain’t mentioned no folks—leas’ways, not
partic’lar.”
“He bound to got some somewhere.”
“Maybe he done ’cided to go jine de war.”
“Well, I sho’ cain’t see Ol’ George wantin’ to shoot
nobody.”
“’Speck he jes’ finally got his belly full an’ we done seen
de las’ o’ him.”
“Oh, heish up, Ashford! You ain’t never got nothin’ good
to say’bout him or nobody else!”
Nearly a month had passed when one Sunday a
whooping and hollering arose—for Ol’ George was back,
grinning shamefacedly, and with him was a painfully shy
creature of a girl as sallow and scrawny as himself, and her
eight-months pregnancy made her seems as if she had
swallowed a pumpkin.
“This is my wife, Miss Martha,” Ol’ George Johnson told
them. “Jes’ befo’ I left, we’d got married, an’ I tol’ ’er I’d be
back when I found us somewhere. How come I hadn’t said
nothin’ ’bout a wife was it was hard enough to find anybody
willing to have jes’ me.” He grinned at his Martha. “Whyn’t
you say hello to the folks?”

Martha dutifully said hello to them all, and it seemed a
long speech for her when she added, “George tol’ me a lot
’bout y’all.”
“Well, I hope whatever he tol’ you was good!” Matilda
said brightly, and Ol’ George saw her glance a second time
at Martha’s extreme pregnancy.
“I ain’t knowed when I left we had a baby comin’. I jes’
kept havin’ a feelin’ I better git back. An’ there she was in a
family way.”
The fragile Martha seemed such a perfect match for Ol’
George Johnson that the family felt their hearts going out to
the pair of them.
“You mean you ain’t even tol’ Massa Murray?” asked
Irene.
“Naw, I ain’t. Jes’ said I had some business same as I tol’
y’all. If he want to run us off, we jes’ have to go, that’s all.”
“Well, I know massa ain’t gwine feel like dat,” said Irene,
and Matilda echoed, “’Cose he ain’t. Massa ain’t dat kind
o’ man.”
“Well, tell him I got to see him first chance,” said Ol’
George Johnson to Matilda.
Leaving nothing to chance, Matilda first informed Missis
Murray, somewhat dramatizing the situation. “Missy, I know
he a oberseer an’ all dat, but him an’ dat po’ l’il wife o’ his’n
jes’ scairt to death massa gwine make ’em leave ’cause he
hadn’t mentioned no wife befo’ an’ times is so hard an’ all.
An’ her time ain’t far off, neither.”
“Well, of course I can’t make my husband’s decisions,
but I’m sure he’ll not put them out—”
“Yes’m, I knowed y’all wouldn’t, ’specially bein’s how I
’speck she ain’t no mo’n thirteen or fo’teen years ol’,
Missis, an’ lookin’ ready to have dat baby any minute, an
done jes’ got here an’ don’t know nobody ’ceptin’ us—an’
y’all.”
Missis Murray said, “Well, as I say, it’s not my affair, it’s
Mr. Murray’s decision. But I do feel certain they can stay
on.”
Returning to the slave row, Matilda told a grateful Ol’
George Johnson not to worry, that Missis Murray had

expressed certainty there would be no problem. Then she
hurried to Irene’s cabin, where after quick consultation, the
two of them ambled over to the converted small shed
behind the barn where the Ol’ George Johnsons were.
Irene knocked, and when Ol’ George Johnson came to
the door, she said, “We worried ’bout yo’ wife. Tell ’er we
do y’alls cookin’ an’ washin’, ’cause she got to save up
what strength she got fo’ her to have y’all’s baby.”
“She sleep now. Sho’ ’preciate it,” he said. “’Cause she
been throwin’ up a lot ever since we got here.”
“Ain’t no wonder. She don’t look to have hardly de
strength of a bird,” said Irene. “You ain’t had no business
bringin’ her all dat long way right dis time nohow,” Matilda
added severely.
“Tried my best to tell ’er that when I went back. But she
wouldn’t have it no other way.”
“S’pose sump’n would o’ happened. You don’t know
nothin’ in de worl’ ’bout ’liverin’ no baby!” exclaimed
Matilda.
He said, “I can’t hardly believe I’m gon’ be no daddy
nohow.”
“Well, you sho’ ’bout to!” Irene nearly laughed at Ol’
George’s worried expression, then she and Matilda turned
and headed back to their cabins.
She and Matilda worried privately. “De po’ gal don’ look
noways right to me,” Matilda muttered in confidence. “Can
nigh see her bones. An’ speck it ’way too late to git her built
up right.”
“Feel like she gwine have a mighty hard time,” Irene
prophesied. “Lawd! I sho’ ain’t never thought I’d end up
likin’ no po’ white folks!”
Less than two more weeks had passed when one
midday Martha’s pains began. The whole slave-row family
heard her agony from within the shed, as Matilda and Irene
labored with her on through the night until shortly before the
next noon. Finally when Irene emerged, her face told the
haggard Ol’ George Johnson even before her mouth could
form the words. “B’leeve Miss Martha gon’ pull through. Yo’
baby was a gal—but she dead.”

CHAPTER 113
The late afternoon of the 1863 New Year’s Day, Matilda
came almost flying into the slave row. “Y’all seen dat white
man jes’ rid in here? Y’all ain’t gon’ b’leeve! He in dere
cussin’ to massa it jes’ come over de railroad telegraph
wire Pres’dent Lincoln done signed ’Mancipation
Proclamation dat set us free!”
The galvanizing news thrust the black Murrays among the
millions more like them exulting wildly within the privacy of
their cabins ... but with each passing week the joyous
awaiting of the freedom dwindled, diminished, and finally
receded into a new despair the more it became clear that
within the steadily more bloodied, ravaged Confederacy
the presidential order had activated nothing but even more
bitter despising of President Lincoln.
So deep was the despair in the Murray slave row that
despite Tom’s intermittent reports of the Yankees winning
major battles, including even the capture of Atlanta, they
refused to build up their freedom hopes anymore until
toward the end of 1864, when they had not seen Tom so
excited for almost two years. He said that his white
customers were describing how untold thousands of
murderous, pillaging Yankees, marching five miles abreast
under some insane General Sherman, were laying waste to
the state of Georgia. However often the family’s hopes had
previously been dashed, they scarcely could suppress their
renewed hope of freedom as Tom brought subsequent
nightly reports.
“Soun’ like de Yankees ain’t leavin’ nothin’! Dem white
mens swears dey’s burnin’ de fiel’s, de big houses, de
barns! Dey’s killin’ de mules an’ cookin’ de cows an’
everythin’ else dey can eat! Whatever dey ain’t burnin’ an’
eatin’ dey’s jes’ ruinin’, plus stealin’ anythin’ dey can tote
off! An’ dey says it’s niggers all out in de woods an’ roads
thick as ants dat done lef ’ dey massas an’ plantations to
follow dem Yankees ’til dat Gen’l Sherman hisself beggin’

’em to go back where dey come fum!”
Then not long after the Yankees’ triumphal march had
reached the sea, Tom breathlessly reported “Charleston
done fell!” . . . and next “Gen’l Grant done took Richmon’!” .
. . and finally in April of 1865, Gen’l Lee done surrendered
de whole ’Federacy Army! De South done give up!”
The jubilance in the slave row was beyond any measure
now as they poured out across the big-house front yard and
up the entry lane to reach the big road to join the hundreds
already there, milling about, leaping and springing up and
down, whooping, shouting, singing, preaching, praying.
“Free, Lawd, free!” . . . “Thank Gawd A’mighty, free at las’!”
But then within a few days the spirit of celebration
plunged into deep grief and mourning with the shattering
news of the assassination of President Lincoln.
“Eeeeeeevil!” shrieked Matilda as the family wept around
her, among the millions like them who had revered the
fallen President as their Moses.
Then in May, as it was happening all across the defeated
South, Massa Murray summoned all of his slaves into the
front yard that faced the big house. When they were all
assembled in a line, they found it hard to look levelly at the
drawn, shocked faces of the massa, the weeping Missis
Murray, and the Ol’ George Johnsons, who, too, were white.
In an anguished voice then, Massa Murray read slowly from
the paper in his hand that the South had lost the war.
Finding it very hard not to choke up before the black family
standing there on the earth before him, he said, “I guess it
means y’all as free as us. You can go if you want to, stay on
if you want, an’ whoever stays, we’ll try to pay you
something—”
The black Murrays began leaping, singing, praying,
screaming anew, “We’s free!” . . . “Free at las’!” ... “Thank
you, Jesus!” The wild celebration’s sounds carried through
the opened door of the small cabin where Lilly Sue’s son,
Uriah, now eight years of age, had laid for weeks suffering
a delirium of fever. “Freedom! Freedom!” Hearing it, Uriah
came boiling up off his cot, his nightshirt flapping; he raced
first for the pigpen shouting, “Ol’ pigs quit gruntin’, you’s

free!” He coursed to the barn, “Ol’ cows, quit givin’ milk,
you’s free!” The boy raced to the chickens next, “Ol’ hens
quit layin’, you’s free!—and so’s ME!”
But that night, with their celebration having ended in their
sheer exhaustion, Tom Murray assembled his large family
within the barn to discuss what they should do now that this
long-awaited “freedom” had arrived. “Freedom ain’t gwine
feed us, it just let us ’cide what we wants to do to eat,” said
Tom. “We ain’t got much money, and ’sides me
blacksmithin’ an’ Mammy cookin’, de only workin’ we
knows is in de fiel’s,” he appraised their dilemma.
Matilda reported that Massa Murray had asked her to
urge them all to consider his offer to parcel out the
plantation, and he would go halves with anyone interested
in sharecropping. There was a heated debate. Several of
the family’s adults wished to leave as quickly as possible.
Matilda protested, “I wants dis family to stay togedder. Now
’bout dis talk o’ movin’, s’pose we did an’ y’all’s pappy
Chicken George git back, an’ nobody couldn’t even tell him
whichaway we’d gone!”
Quiet fell when Tom made it clear he wished to speak.
“Gwine tell y’all how come we can’t leave yet—it’s ’cause
we jes’ ain’t noways ready. Whenever we git ourselves
ready, I’ll be de firs’ one to want to go.” Most were finally
convinced that Tom talked “good sense,” and the family
meeting broke up.
Taking Irene by the hand, Tom went walking with her in
the moonlight toward the fields. Vaulting lightly over a fence,
he took long strides, made a right-angle turn, and paced off
a square, then striding back toward the rail fence, he said,
“Irene, that’s going to be ours!” She echoed him, softly.
“Ours.”
Within a week, the family’s separate units were each
working their fields. A morning when Tom had left his
blacksmith shop to help his brothers, he recognized a lone
rider along the road as the former Cavalry Major Cates, his
uniform tattered and his horse spavined. Cates also
recognized Tom, and riding near the fence, he reined up.
“Hey, nigger, bring me a dipperful of your water!” he called.

Tom looked at the nearby water bucket, then he studied
Cates’ face for a long moment before moving to the bucket.
He filled the dipper and walked to hand it to Cates. “Things
is changed now, Mr. Cates,” Tom spoke evenly. “The only
reason I brought you this water is because I’d bring any
thirsty man a drink, not because you hollered. I jes’ want you
to know that.”
Cates handed back the dipper. “Git me another one,
nigger.”
Tom took the dipper and dropped it back into the bucket
and walked off, never once looking back.
But when another rider came galloping and hallooing
along the road with a battered black derby distinguishable
above a faded green scarf, those out in the fields erupted
into a mass footrace back toward the old slave row.
“Mammy, he’s back! He’s back!” When the horse reached
the yard, Chicken George’s sons hauled him off onto their
shoulders and went trooping with him to the weeping
Matilda.
“What you bellerin’ fo’, woman?” he demanded in mock
indignation, hugging her as if he would never let go, but
finally he did, yelling to his family to assemble and be quiet.
“Tell y’all later ’bout all de places I been an’ things I done
since we las’ seen one’nother,” hollered Chicken George.
“But right now I got to ’quaint you wid where we’s all gwine
togedder!” In pindrop quiet and with his born sense of
drama, Chicken George told them now that he had found
for them all a western Tennessee settlement whose white
people anxiously awaited their arrival to help build a town.
“Lemme tell y’all sump’n! De lan’ where we goin’ so
black an’ rich, you plant a pig’s tail an’ a hog’ll grow ... you
can’t hardly sleep nights for de watermelons growin’ so fas’
dey cracks open like firecrackers! I’m tellin’ you it’s
possums layin’ under ’simmon trees too fat to move, wid de
’simmon sugar drippin’ down on ’em thick as ’lasses . . . !”
The family never let him finish in their wild excitement. As
some went dashing off to boast to others on adjacent
plantations, Tom began planning that afternoon how to alter
a farm wagon into a covered “Rockaway,” of which about

ten could move all of the units of the family to this new
place. But by that sundown a dozen other heads of newly
freed families had come—not asking, but demanding that
their families, too, were going—they were black Holts,
Fitzpatricks, Perms, Taylors, Wrights, Lakes, Mac-Gregors,
and others, from local Alamance County plantations.
Amid the next two months of feverish activity, the men
built the “Rockaways.” “The women butchered, cooked,
canned, and smoked foodstuffs for travel and selecting
what other vital things to take. Old Chicken George strode
about, supervising every activity, loving his hero role. Tom
Murray was thronged with volunteered assistance from yet
more newly freed families, and with assurances that they
would swiftly obtain their own wagons to become their
family’s “Rockaways.” Finally he announced that all who
wished could go—but that there must be but one
“Rockaway” per family unit. When at last twenty-eight
wagons were packed and ready to roll on the following
sunup, in a strange calm sense of sadness, the freed
people went about gently touching the familiar things,
washpots, the fenceposts, knowing that it was for the last
time.
For days, the black Murrays had caught only glimpses of
the white Murrays. Matilda wept, “Lawd, I hates to think
what dey’s goin’ through, I swears I does!”
Tom Murray had retired for the night within his wagon
when he heard the light knocking at the tailgate. Somehow
he knew who was there even before he opened the end
flap. Ol’ George Johnson stood there, his face working with
emotion, his hands wringing his hat. “Tom—like a word with
you, if you got time—”
Climbing down from the wagon, Tom Murray followed Ol’
George Johnson off a way in the moonlight. When finally Ol’
George stopped, he was so choked with embarrassment
and emotion that he could hardly talk. “Me and Martha been
talkin’ ... jes’ seem like y’all the only folks we got. Tom, we
been wonderin’ if y’all let us go along where you goin’?”
It was awhile before Tom spoke. “If it was jes’ my family, I
could tell you right now. But it’s a lot mo’. I jes’ have to talk it

over wid’em all. I let you know—”
Tom went to each other wagon, knocking gently, calling
out the men. Gathering them, he told them what happened.
There was a moment of heavy quiet. Tom Murray offered,
“He was ’bout de bes’ oberseer for us I ever heard of
’cause he wasn’t no real oberseer at all, he worked wid us
shoulder to shoulder.”
There was sharp opposition from some, some of it
antiwhite. But after a while someone spoke quietly, “He
can’t help it if he white—” Finally, a vote was taken, and a
majority said that the Johnsons could go.
One day’s delay was necessary to build a “Rockaway”
for Ol’ George and Martha. Then the next sunup, a singlefile caravan of twenty-nine covered “Rockaways” went
creaking and groaning off the Murray place into the dawn.
Ahead of the wagons rode the derbied and scarfed sixtyseven-year-old Chicken George, carrying his old one-eyed
fighting rooster atop his horse “Old Bob.” Behind him, Tom
Murray drove the first wagon, with Irene beside him, and
behind them, goggle-eyed in excitement, were their
children, the youngest of them the two-year-old Cynthia.
And after twenty-seven more wagons whose front seats
held black or mulatto men and their wives, finally the anchor
wagon’s seat held Ol’ George and Martha Johnson, who
soon were peering to see clearly through the haze of dust
raised by all the hoofs and wheels moving ahead of them
toward what Chicken George had sworn would prove to be
the promised land.

CHAPTER 114
“Dis it?” asked Tom.
“De promised lan’?” asked Matilda.
“Where dem pigs an’ watermelons poppin’ out’n de
groun’?” asked one of the children, as Chicken George
reined his horse to a halt.
Ahead of them was a clearing in the woods with a few
wooden storefronts at the intersection of the rutted road
they were on and another one crossing it at right angles.
Three white men—one sitting on a nail keg, another in a
rocker, the third propped on the back legs of a stool with
his back to a clapboard wall and his feet on a hitching post
—nudged one another and nodded at the line of dusty
wagons and their passengers. A couple of white boys
rolling a hoop stopped in their tracks and stared, the hoop
rolling on beyond them into the middle of the road, where it
twirled a few times and fell. An elderly black man sweeping
off a stoop looked at them impassively for a long moment
and then broke into a small, slow smile. A large dog that
was scratching himself beside a rain barrel paused, leg in
the air, to cock his head at them, then went back to
scratching.
“I done tol’ y’all dis here a new settlement,” said Chicken
George, talking fast. “Dey’s only a hundred or so white folks
livin’ roun’ here yet, an’ even wid jes’ our fifteen wagons lef’
after all dem dat dropped off to settle on de way here, we’s
jes’ ’bout gon’ double de pop’lation. We’s gittin’ in on de
groun’ flo’ of a growin’ town.”
“Well, ain’t nothin’ it can do but grow, dat’s sho’,” said L’il
George without smiling.
“Jes wait’ll y’all sees de prime farmlan’ dey got,” said his
father brightly, rubbing his hands with anticipation.
“Prob’ly swamp,” muttered Ashford, wisely not loud
enough for Chicken George to hear.
But it was prime—rich and loamy, thirty acres of it for
every family, scattered on checkerboard plots from the

outskirts of town all the way to the white-owned farms that
already occupied the best land in Lauderdale County, on
the banks of the Hatchie River six miles to the north. Many
of the white farms were as large as all of their property put
together, but thirty acres was thirty more than any of them
had ever owned before, and they had their hands full with

that.
Still living in their cramped wagons, the families began
grubbing up stumps and clearing brush the next morning.
Soon the furrows had been plowed and their first crops
planted—mostly cotton, some corn, with plots for
vegetables and a patch for flowers. As they set about the
next task of sawing down trees and splitting logs to build
their cabins, Chicken George circulated from one farm to
another on his horse, volunteering his advice on
construction and trumpeting how he had changed their
lives. Even among Henning’s white settlers he boasted
about how those he had brought with him were going to
help the town grow and prosper, not failing to mention that
his middle son Tom would soon be opening the area’s first
blacksmith shop.
One day soon afterward, three white men rode up to
Tom’s plot as he and his sons were mixing a load of mud
with hog bristles to chink the walls of his half-built cabin.
“Which one of you is the blacksmith?” one called from his
horse.
Sure that his first customers had arrived even before he
could get set up for business, Tom stepped out proudly.
“We hear you’re figurin’ to open a blacksmith shop here
in town,” one said.
“Yassuh. Been lookin’ fo’ de bes’ spot to build it. Was
thinkin’ maybe dat empty lot nex’ to de sawmill if ’n nobody
else got his eye on it.”
The three men exchanged glances. “Well, boy,” the
second man went on, “no need of wasting time, we’ll get
right to the point. You can blacksmith, that’s fine. But if you
want to do it in this town, you’ll have to work for a white man
that owns the shop. Had you figured on that?”
Such a rage flooded up in Tom that nearly a minute

passed before he could trust himself to speak. “Nawsuh, I
ain’t,” he said slowly. “Me an’ my family’s free peoples now,
we’s jes’ lookin’ to make our livin’s like anybody else, by
workin’ hard at what we knows to do.” He looked directly
into the men’s eyes. “If I cain’t own what I do wid my own
hands, den dis ain’t no place fo’ us.”
The third white man said, “If that’s the way you feel, I
’speck you’re going to be ridin’ a long way in this state,
boy.”
“Well, we’s used to travelin’,” said Tom. “Ain’t wantin’ to
cause no trouble nowhere, but I got to be a man. I just wisht
I could o’ knowed how y’all felt here so my family wouldn’t of
troubled y’all by stoppin’ atall.”
“Well, think about it, boy,” said the second white man. “It’s
up to you.”
“You people got to learn not to let all this freedom talk go
to your heads,” said the first man.
Turning their horses around without another word, they
rode off.
When the news went flashing among the farm plots, the
heads of each family came hurrying to see Tom.
“Son,” said Chicken George, “you’s knowed all yo’ life
how white folks is. Cain’t you jes’ start out dey way? Den
good as you blacksmiths, won’t take hardly no time to git
’em to turn roun’.”
“All dat travelin’ an’ now pack up an’ go again!”
exclaimed Matilda. “Don’t do dat to yo’ fam’ly, son!”
Irene joined the chorus: “Tom, please! I’se jes’ tired!
Tired!”
But Tom’s face was grim. “Things don’t never git better
less’n you makes ’em better!” he said. “Ain’t stayin’
nowhere I can’t do what a free man got a right to do. Ain’t
axin’ nobody else to go wid us, but we packin’ our wagon
an’ leavin’ tomorrow.”
“I’m comin’, too!” said Ashford angrily.
That night Tom went out walking by himself, weighed
down by guilt at the new hardship he was imposing upon
his family. He played back in his mind the ordeal they had
all endured in the wagons, rolling for weeks on end . . . and

he thought of something Matilda had said often: “You
search hard enough in sump’n bad, you’s jes’ liable to find
sump’n good.”
When the idea struck him, he kept walking for another
hour, letting the plan become a picture in his mind. Then he
strode quickly back to the wagon where his family was
sleeping and went to bed.
In the morning, Tom told James and Lewis to build
temporary lean-tos for Irene and the children to sleep in, for
he would need the wagon. As the family stood around
watching him in amazement—Ashford with rising disbelief
and fury—he unloaded the heavy anvil with Virgil’s help,
and mounted it atop a newly sawed stump. By noon he had
set up a makeshift forge. With everyone still staring, he next
removed the canvas top of the wagon, then its wooden
sides, leaving the bare flatbed, on which he now went to
work with his heaviest tools. Gradually they began to
perceive the astounding idea that Tom was turning into a
reality.
By the end of that week, Tom drove right through town
with his rolling blacksmith shop, and there wasn’t a man,
woman, or child who didn’t stand there gaping at the anvil,
forge, and cooling tub, with racks holding a neat array of
blacksmithing tools, all mounted sturdily on a wagon bed
reinforced with heavy timbers.
Nodding politely at all the men he met—white and black
—Tom asked if they had blacksmithing jobs he could do at
reasonable rates. Within days, his services were being
requested at more and more farms around the new
settlement, for no one could think of a good reason why a
black man shouldn’t do business from a wagon. By the time
they realized that he was doing far better with his rolling
shop than he ever could have done with a stationary one,
Tom had made himself so indispensable around town that
they couldn’t afford to raise any objections even if they’d
wanted to. But they didn’t really want to, because Tom
seemed to them the kind of man who did his job and
minded his own business, and they couldn’t help respecting
that. In fact, the whole family soon established themselves

as decent Christian folk who paid their bills and kept to
themselves—and “stayed in their place,” as Ol’ George
Johnson said a group of white men had put it in a
conversation he’d overheard down at the general store.
But Ol’ George, too, was treated as one of “them”—
shunned socially, kept waiting in stores till all the other white
customers had been taken care of, even informed once by
a merchant that he’d “bought” a hat that he’d tried on and
put back on the shelf when he found it was too small. He
told the family about it later, perching the hat atop his head
for them, and everybody laughed as hard as he did. “I’se
surprised dat hat don’t fit,” cracked L’il George, “dumb as
you is to try it on in dat sto’.” Ashford, of course, got so
angry that he threatened—emptily—to “go down dere an’
stuff it down dat peckerwood’s throat.”
However little use the white community had for them—
and vice versa—Tom and the others knew very well that the
town’s tradesmen could hardly contain their elation at the
brisk increase in business they’d been responsible for.
Though they made most of their own clothes, raised most of
their own food, and cut most of their own lumber, the
quantities of nails, corrugated tin, and barbed wire they
bought over the next couple of years testified to the rate at
which their own community was growing.
With all their houses, barns, sheds, and fences built by
1874, the family—led by Matilda—turned its attention to an
enterprise they considered no less important to their
welfare: the construction of a church to replace the
makeshift bush arbors that had been serving as their place
of worship. It took almost a year, and much of their savings,
but when Tom, his brothers, and their boys had finished
building the last pew and Irene’s beautiful white handwoven
cloth—emblazoned with a purple cross—had been draped
over the pulpit in front of the $250 stained-glass window
they’d ordered from Sears, Roebuck, everyone agreed that
the New Hope Colored Methodist Episcopal Church was
well worth the time, effort, and expense it represented.
So many people attended the service that first Sunday—
just about every black person within twenty miles who could

walk or be carried—that the crowd spilled out the doors
and windows and across the lawn surrounding it. But
nobody had any trouble hearing every word of the ringing
sermon delivered by the Reverend Sylus Henning, a former
slave of Dr. D. C. Henning, an Illinois Central Railroad
executive with extensive land holdings around town. In the
course of his oration, L’il George whispered to Virgil that
the Reverend seemed to be under the impression that he
was Dr. Henning, but no one within earshot would have
dared to question the fervor of his preaching.
After the last heartrending chorus of “The Old Rugged
Cross,” again—led by Matilda, looking more radiant than
Chicken George had ever seen her—the congregation
dried their eyes and filed out past the preacher, pumping
his hand and slapping him on the back. Retrieving their
picnic baskets on the porch, they spread sheets on the
lawn and proceeded to relish the fried chicken, pork chop
sandwiches, deviled eggs, potato salad, cole slaw, pickles,
cornbread, lemonade, and so many cakes and pickles that
even L’il George was gasping for breath when he finished
the last slice.
As they all sat chatting, or strolled around—the men and
boys in coat and tie, the older women all in white, the girls
in bright-colored dresses with a ribbon at the waist—
Matilda watched misty-eyed as her brood of grandchildren
ran about tirelessly playing tag and catch. Turning finally to
her husband and putting her hand on his, gnarled and
scarred with gamecock scratches, she said quietly, “I won’t
never forget dis day, George. We done come a long way
since you first come courtin’ me wid dat derby hat o’ yours.
Our fam’ly done growed up an’ had chilluns of dey own, an’
de Lawd seen fit to keep us all togedder. De onliest thing I
wish is you Mammy Kizzy could be here to see it wid us.”
Eyes brimming, Chicken George looked back at her.
“She lookin’, baby. She sho’ is!”

CHAPTER 115
Promptly at the noon hour on Monday, during their break
from the fields, the children started filing into church for their
first day of school indoors. For the past two years, ever
since she came to town after being one among the first
graduating class from Lane College in Jackson,
Tennessee, Sister Carrie White had been teaching out
under the bush arbors, and this use of the church was a
great occasion. The New Hope CME stewards—Chicken
George, Tom, and his brothers—had contributed the
money to buy pencils, tablets, and primers on “readin’,
writin’, an’ ’rithmetic.” Since she taught all the children of
school age at the same time, in her six grades Sister
Carrie had pupils ranging from five to fifteen, including
Tom’s oldest five: Maria Jane, who was twelve; Ellen;
Viney; L’il Matilda; and Elizabeth, who was six. Young Tom,
next in line, began the year after that, and then Cynthia, the
youngest.
By the time Cynthia was graduated in 1883, Maria Jane
had dropped out, gotten married, and given birth to her first
child; and Elizabeth, who was the best student in the family,
had taught their father Tom Murray how to write his name
and had even become his blacksmithing bookkeeper. He
needed one, for by this time he had become so successful
with his rolling blacksmith shop that he had also built a
stationary one—without a murmur of objection—and was
among the more prosperous men in town.
About a year after Elizabeth went to work for her father,
she fell in love with John Toland, a newcomer to Henning
who had gone to work sharecropping on the six-hundredacre farm of a white family out near the Hatchie River. She
had met him in town one day at the general store and been
impressed, she told her mother Irene, not only by his good
looks and muscular build but also by his dignified manner
and obvious intelligence. He could even write a little, she
noticed, when he signed for a receipt. Over the next several

weeks, during the walks she’d take with him in the woods
once or twice each week, she also found out that he was a
young man of fine reputation, a churchgoer, who had
ambitions of saving up enough to start a farm of his own;
and that he was as gentle as he was strong.
It wasn’t until they’d seen each other regularly for almost
two months—and had begun to talk secretly about
marriage—that Tom Murray, who had known about them
from the start, ordered her to stop skulking around and
bring him home from church the following Sunday. Elizabeth
did as she was told. John Toland couldn’t have been
friendlier or more respectful when he was introduced to
Tom Murray, who was even more taciturn than usual, and
excused himself after only a few minutes of painful
pleasantries. After John Toland left, Elizabeth was called by
Tom Murray, who said sternly: “It’s plain to see from de way
you act roun’ dat boy dat you’s stuck on ’im. You two got
anythin’ in mind?”
“What you mean, Pappy?” she stuttered, flushing hotly.
“Gittin’ married! Dat’s on your mind, ain’t it?”
She couldn’t speak.
“You done tol’ me. Well, I’d like to give you my blessin’s,
’cause I wants you to be happy much as you does. He
seem like a good man—but I can’t let you hitch up wid ’im.”
Elizabeth looked at him uncomprehendingly.
“He too high-yaller. He could nigh ’bout pass fo’ white—
jes’ not quite. He ain’t fish or fowl. Y’unnerstan’ what I’se
sayin’? He too light fo’ black folks, too dark fo’ white folks.
He cain’t he’p what he look like, but don’t care how hard he
try, he never gon’ b’long nowhere. An’ you got to think ’bout
what yo’ chilluns might look like! I don’t want dat kinda life
fo’ you, ’Lizabeth.”
“But Pappy, ever’body like John! If ’n we gits ’long wid Ol’
George Johnson, why can’t we git ’long wid him?”
“Ain’t de same!”
“But Pappy!” she was desperate. “You talk ’bout people
not’ceptin’ ’im! You’s de one ain’t!”
“Dat’s ’nough! You done said all I’m gon’ hear ’bout it.
You ain’t got de sense to keep ’way from dat kinda grief, I

gotta do it fo’ you. I don’ want you seein’ ’im no mo’.”
“But Pappy . . .” She was sobbing.
“It’s over wid! Dat’s all is to it!”
“If ’n I cain’t marry John, ain’t never gon’ marry nobody!”
Elizabeth screamed.
Tom Murray turned and strode from the room, slamming
the door. In the next room, he stopped.
“Tom, what do you . . .” Irene began, sitting up rigidly in
her rocker.
“Ain’t got no mo’ to say ’bout it!” he snapped, marching
out the front door.
When Matilda found out about it, she got so angry that
Irene had to restrain her from confronting Tom. “Dat boy’s
pappy got white blood in ’im!” she shouted. Suddenly
wincing, then clutching at her chest, Matilda lurched against
a table. Irene caught her as she toppled to the floor.
“O my God!” she moaned, her face contorted with pain.
“Sweet Jesus! O Lawd, no!” Her eyelids fluttered and
closed.
“Grandmammy!” Irene shouted, seizing her around the
shoulders. “Grandmammy!” She put her head to her chest
and listened. There was still a heartbeat. But two days later
it stopped.
Chicken George didn’t cry. But there was something
heart-breaking about his stoniness, the deadness in his
eyes. From that day on, no one could remember him ever
smiling again or saying a civil word to anyone. He and
Matilda had never seemed really close—but when she
died, somehow his own warmth died with her. And he
began to shrink, dry up, grow old almost overnight—not
turning feeble and weak-minded but hard and meantempered. Refusing to live anymore in the cabin he had
shared with Matilda, he began to roost with one son or
daughter after another until both he and they were fed up,
when old gray-headed Chicken George moved on. When
he wasn’t complaining, he’d usually sit on the porch in the
rocker he took along with him and stare fiercely out across
the fields for hours at a time.
He had just turned eighty-three—having cantankerously

refused to touch a bite of the birthday cake that was baked
for him—and was sitting late in the winter of 1890 in front of
the fire at his eldest granddaughter Maria Jane’s house.
She had ordered him to sit still and rest his bad leg while
she hurried out to the adjacent field with her husband’s
lunch. When she returned as quickly as she could, she
found him lying on the hearth, where he’d dragged himself
after falling into the fire. Maria Jane’s screams brought her
husband running. The derby hat, scarf, and sweater were
smoldering, and Chicken George was burned horribly from
his head to his waist. Late that night he died.
Nearly everyone black in Henning attended his funeral,
dozens of them his children, grandchildren, or greatgrandchildren. Standing there by the grave as he was
lowered into the ground beside Matilda, his son L’il George
leaned to Virgil and whispered: “Pappy so tough ’speck he
wouldn’t o’ never died natural.”
Virgil turned and looked sadly at his brother. “I loved ’im,”
he said quietly. “You too, an’ all us.”
“’Cose we did,” said L’il George. “Nobody couldn’t stan’
livin’ wid de cockadoodlin’ ol’ rascal, an’ look now at
ever’body snufflin’’cause he gone!”

CHAPTER 116
“Mama!” Cynthia breathlessly exclaimed to Irene, “Will
Palmer done axed to walk me home from church nex’
Sunday!”
“He ain’t ’zackly one to rush into things, is he? Leas’ two
years I seen ’im watchin’ you in church every Sunday—”
said Irene.
“Who?” Tom asked.
“Will Palmer! Is it awright for him to walk her home?”
After a while Tom Murray said drily, “I think ’bout it.”
Cynthia went off looking as if she had been stabbed,
leaving Irene studying her husband’s face. “Tom, ain’t
nobody good ’nough fo’ yo’ gals? Anybody in town know
dat young Will jes’ ’bout run de lumber company fo’ dat ol’
stay-drunk Mr. James. Folks all over Henning seen ’im
unload de lumber off de freight cars hisself, sell it an’
deliver it hisself, den write out de bills, colleck de money,
an’’posit it in de bank hisself. Even do different l’il
carpenterin’ de customers needs an’ ax nothin’ fo’ it. An’
wid all dat fo’ whatever l’il he make, he don’t never speak a
hard word ’gainst ol’ Mr. James.”
“De way I sees it, doin’ his job an’ mindin’ his own
business,” said Tom Murray. “I sees ’im in church, too, half
de gals in dere battin’ dey eyes at ’im.”
“’Cose dey is!” said Irene, “’cause he de bes’ catch in
Henning. But he ain’t never yet ax to walk none home.”
“How ’bout dat Lula Carter he gave dem flowers to?”
Astonished that Tom even knew, Irene said, “Dat more’n
a year ago, Tom, an’ if you knows so much, reckon you also
know she carried on like sich a fool after dat, fawnin’ roun’
’im like a shadow, he finally quit talkin’ to her at all!”
“He done it once, he could do it agin.”
“Not to Cynthia, he ain’t, not much sense as she got,
’long wid bein’ pretty an’ well raised. She done tol’ me
much as she like Will, she ain’t never let on to ’im how she
feel! Mos’ she ever say is howdy an smile back when he

do. Don’t care how many gals buzzin’ after ’im, you see
who he buzzin’ after!”
“See you got everythin’ worked out,” said Tom.
Irene pleaded, “Aw, Tom, let ’im walk de child home.
Leas’ let’em git togedder. Dey stays togedder’s up to
dem.”
“An’ me!” Tom said sternly. He did not want to seem too
easy to any of his daughters, his wife either. Above all, he
did not want Irene aware that before now he had seen the
potential, had weighed it, and thoroughly approved of Will
Palmer if the time came. Having watched young Will since
he had come to Henning, Tom privately had often wished
that either of his two sons showed half of young Will’s
gumption. In fact, the deviously serious, ambitious, highly
capable Will Palmer reminded Tom of a younger himself.
No one had expected that the courtship would develop
so fast. Ten months later, in the “company room” of Tom
and Irene’s new four-room house, Will proposed to Cynthia,
who barely could restrain her “Yes!” until he had finished
speaking. The third Sunday from then, they were married in
the New Hope CME Church in a ceremony attended by well
over two hundred people, about half of whom had come
from North Carolina on the wagon train, and their children—
and who now lived on farms scattered throughout
Lauderdale County.
Will with his own hands and tools built their small home
where, a year later, in 1894, their first child, a son, was
born, who died within a few days. By now Will Palmer never
took off a weekday from work, the lumber company’s harddrinking owner being so far gone into the bottle that Will
practically was running the entire business. Going over the
company’s books one stormy late Friday afternoon, Will
discovered a bank payment overdue that day at People’s
Bank. He rode his horse eight miles through drenching
rains to knock at the bank president’s back porch.
“Mr. Vaughan,” he said, “this payment slipped Mr.
James’ mind, and I know he wouldn’t want to keep you
waitin’ till Monday.”
Invited inside to dry, he said, “No, thank you, sir, Cynthia’ll

be wonderin’ where I am.” And wishing the banker a good
night, he rode back off in the rain.
The banker, deeply impressed, told the incident all over
town.
In the fall of 1893, someone came and told Will he was
wanted at the bank. Puzzled throughout the few minutes’
walk there, Will found inside, waiting for him, Henning’s ten
leading white businessmen, all seeming red-faced and
embarrassed. Banker Vaughan explained, speaking
rapidly, that the lumber company’s owner had declared
bankruptcy, with plans to move elsewhere with his family.
“Henning needs the lumber company,” said the banker. “All
of us you see here have been weeks discussing it, and we
can’t think of anyone better to run it than you, Will. We’ve
agreed to cosign a note to pay off the company’s debts for
you to take over as the new owner.”
Tears trickling down his cheeks, Will Palmer walked
wordlessly along the line of white men. As he doublegripped and squeezed each hand, then that man hurriedly
signed the note and even more quickly left with tears in his
own eyes. When they had all gone, Will wrung the banker’s
hand for a long moment. “Mr. Vaughan, I’ve got one more
favor to ask. Would you take half of my savings and make
out a check for Mr. James, without his ever knowing where
it came from?”
Within a year, Will’s credo—to provide the best possible
goods and service for the lowest possible price—was
drawing customers even from adjoining towns, and
wagonloads of people, mostly black, were coming from as
far away as Memphis—forty-eight miles to the South—to
see with their own eyes western Tennessee’s first blackowned business of its kind, where Cynthia had hung ruffled,
starched curtains in the windows and Will had painted the
sign on the front: “W. E. PALMER LUMBER COMPANY.”

CHAPTER 117
Cynthia’s and Will’s prayers were answered in 1895 with
the birth of the sound, healthy girl whom they named Bertha
George—the “George” after Will’s father. Cynthia insisted
on assembling a houseful of family before whom she told
the gurgling infant the whole story back to the African, Kunta
Kinte, just as Tom Murray had told it to all of his children at
intervals when they had been young.
Will Palmer respected Cynthia’s devotion to her
ancestors’ memory, but it irritated his own deep pride to be
considered as having married into Cynthia’s family rather
than the other way around. It was probably why he began to
monopolize little Bertha even before she could walk. Every
morning he carried her about before he left for work. Every
night he tucked her into the little crib that he had made with
his hands for her.
By the time Bertha was five, the rest of the family and
much of the town’s black community quoted Cynthia and
speaking for themselves echoed her opinion, “Will Palmer
jes’ spilin’ dat gal to pieces!” He had arranged that she had
credit at every Henning store that sold candy; and he paid
the bill each month, though he made her keep an
accounting, which he solemnly checked “to teach her
business.” As her fifteenth-birthday present, when he
opened a Sears, Roebuck mail-order account in her name,
the people shook and wagged their heads in mingled
astonishment, dismay—and pride: “All dat young’un got to
do is pick what she like out’n dat pitcher catalogue, an’
write off de order blank, an’ firs’ thing you knows dem
Sears, Roebuck white folks way yonder in Chicago done
sent it—seen it wid dese here eyes . . . an’ her daddy pays
fo’ it . . . you hearin’ what I’m tellin’ you, chile? Anythin’ dat
Bertha want!’
Later that same year, Will hired a teacher to come
weekly all the way from Memphis to give Bertha piano
lessons. She was a gifted pupil, and before long was

playing for the choir in the New Hope Colored Methodist
Episcopal Church, of which Will was the senior trustee and
Cynthia was the perennial president of the Stewardess
Board.
When Bertha finished the local eighth grade in June of
1909, there was no question that she would be leaving
Henning to attend the CME Church-supported Lane
Institute thirty miles to the east in Jackson, Tennessee,
which went from ninth grade through two years of college.
“Gal, jes’ no way you can know . . . what it mean, you
bein’ dis fam’ly’s firs’ one headin’ fo’ a college—”
“Maw, if I can ever git you and Paw to please quit saying
such as ‘dis’ and ‘ fo’! I keep telling you they’re pronounced
‘this’ and ‘ for’! Anyway, isn’t that why colleges are there?
For people to go to?”
Cynthia wept when she got alone with her husband.
“Lawd God he’p us wid ’er, Will, she jes’ don’t unnerstan’.”
“Maybe she best don’t,” he tried to console. “I jes’ know
I’ll draw my last breath seein’ she have better chance’n us
did.”
As was only expected of her, Bertha achieved
consistently high grades—studying pedagogy, to become a
teacher—and she both played the piano and sang in the
school choir. On one of her two weekend visits back home
every month, she persuaded her father to have a sign
painted on both doors of his delivery truck: “Henning 121—
Your Lumber Number.” Telephones recently had come to
Henning; it was typical of Bertha’s ready wit, which got
quoted often around town.
On later visits, Bertha began to speak about a young
man whom she had met in the college choir, his name,
Simon Alexander Haley, and he was from a town named
Savannah, Tennessee. Being very poor, she said, he was
working at as many as four odd jobs at the time in order to
stay in school, where he was studying agriculture. When
Bertha continued to talk about him, a year later, in 1913,
Will and Cynthia suggested that she invite him to visit with
them in Henning, so they could appraise him in person.
The New Hope CME Church was packed on the Sunday

it had been circulated that “Bertha’s beau from college”
would be in attendance. He arrived under the searching
scrutiny not only of Will and Cynthia Palmer, but also of the
total black community. But he seemed a very self-assured
young man. After singing a baritone solo, “In the Garden,”
accompanied by Bertha at the piano, he talked easily with
all who crowded about him later out in the churchyard, he
looked everyone squarely in the eyes, firmly gripping all of
the men’s hands, and tipping his hat to all of the ladies.
Bertha and her Simon Alexander Haley—his full name—
returned to Lane College together on the bus that evening.
No one had a thing to say against him—publicly—in the
ensuing community discussions. Privately, though, some
queasy uncertainties were expressed concerning his very
nearly high-yaller complexion. (He had told dark brown
Bertha in confidence that his parents, former slaves, had
both told him of having slave mothers and Irish white
fathers, paternally an overseer named Jim Baugh, of whom
little else was known, and maternally a Marion County,
Alabama, plantation scion and later Civil War colonel
named James Jackson.) But it was agreed by all that he
sang well; that he seemed to have been well raised; and he
showed no signs of trying to put on airs just because he
was educated.
Haley landed a summer’s work as a Pullman porter,
saving every possible penny to enable his transferring to
the four-year A&T College in Greensboro, North Carolina,
exchanging weekly letters with Bertha. When World War I
came, he and all other males in their senior class enlisted
en masse in the U. S. Army, and before long his letters to
Bertha came from France, where in the Argonne Forest in
1918, he was gassed. After treatment for several months in
a hospital overseas, he was returned home to convalesce,
and in 1919, fully recovered, he came again to Henning and
he and Bertha announced their engagement.
Their wedding in the New Hope CME Church in the
summer of 1920 was Henning’s first social event attended
by both black and white—not only since Will Palmer by now
was among the town’s most prominent citizens, but also

because in her own right the accomplished, irrepressible
Bertha was someone whom all in Henning regarded with
pride. The reception was held on the wide, sloping lawn of
the Palmers’ brand-new home of ten rooms, including a
music parlor and a library. A banquet of food was served;
more presents were heaped than were normally seen at an
average three weddings; there was even a recital by the full
Lane College Choir—in whose ranks the ecstatic
newlyweds had met—which had come in the bus that Will
Palmer had chartered from Jackson.
Late that day, Henning’s little railroad depot was overrun
as Simon and Bertha boarded the Illinois Central train that
took them through the night to Chicago, where they
changed onto another bound for somewhere called Ithaca,
New York. Simon was going to study for his master’s
degree in agriculture at some “Cornell University,” and
Bertha would be enrolling at a nearby “Ithaca Conservatory
of Music.”
For about nine months, Bertha wrote home regularly,
reporting their exciting experiences so far away and telling
how happy they were with each other. But then, in the early
summer of 1921, Bertha’s letters began to arrive less and
less often, until finally Cynthia and Will grew deeply
concerned that something was wrong that Bertha wasn’t
telling them about. Will gave Cynthia five hundred dollars to
send to Bertha, telling Bertha to use it however they might
need it, without mentioning it to Simon. But their daughter’s
letters came even more seldom, until by late August,
Cynthia told Will and their closest friends that she was
going to New York herself to find out what was the matter.
Two days before Cynthia was due to leave, a midnight
knocking at the front door awakened them in alarm. Cynthia
was first out of bed, snatching on her robe, with Will close
behind. At their bedroom’s doorway, she could see through
the living room’s glasspaneled french doors the moonlit
silhouettes of Bertha and Simon on the front porch. Cynthia
went shrieking and bounding to snatch open the door.
Bertha said calmly, “Sorry we didn’t write. We wanted to
bring you a surprise present—” She handed to Cynthia the

blanketed bundle in her arms. Her heart pounding, and with
Will gazing incredulously over her shoulder, Cynthia pulled
back the blanket’s top fold—revealing a round brown
face....
The baby boy, six weeks old, was me.

CHAPTER 118
I used to be told later by Dad, laughing in recalling that night
of big surprise as he loved to do, “Seemed I’d nearly lost a
son a little while there—” Dad declared Grandpa Will
Palmer walked around and lifted me out of Grandma’s
arms “and without a word took you out to the yard and
around the rear of the house somewhere. Why, he must
have stayed gone I believe as long as half an hour” before
returning, “with Cynthia, Bertha, or me saying not a word to
him of it, either, I guess for one reason just because he was
Will Palmer, and the other thing was all of us knew how
badly for many years he’d wanted to have a son to raise—I
guess in your being Bertha’s boy, you’d become it.”
After a week or so, Dad went back alone to Ithaca,
leaving Mama and me in Henning; they had decided it
would be better while he finished pushing for his master’s
degree. Grandpa and Grandma proceeded to just about
adopt me as their own—especially Grandpa.
Even before I could talk, Grandma would say years later,
he would carry me in his arms, down to the lumber
company, where he built a crib to put me in while he took
care of business. After I had learned to walk, we would go
together downtown, me taking three steps to each of his,
my small fist tightly grasped about his extended left
forefinger. Looming over me like a black, tall, strong tree,
Grandpa would stop and chat with people we met along the
way. Grandpa taught me to look anyone right in their eyes,
to speak to them clearly and politely. Sometimes people
exclaimed how well raised I was and how fine I was
growing up. “Well, I guess he’ll do,” Grandpa would
respond.
Down at the W. E. Palmer Lumber Company, he would
let me play around among the big stacks of oak, cedar,
pine, and hickory, all in planks of different lengths and
widths, and with their mingling of good smells, and I would
imagine myself involved in all kinds of exciting adventures,

almost always in faraway times or places. And sometimes
Grandpa would let me sit in his office in his big, highbacked swivel chair with his green-visored eyeshade on my
head, swiveling around and back and forth until I’d get so
dizzy my head seemed to keep going after I’d stopped. I
enjoyed myself anywhere I ever went with Grandpa.
Then, when I was going on five, he died. I was so
hysterical that Dr. Dillard had to give me a glass of
something milky to make me sleep that night. But before I
did, I remember drowsily glimpsing many people, black and
white, gathering in a ragged line along the dusty road that
ran nearby the house, all of their heads bowed, the women
wearing headscarves, the men holding their hats in their
hands. For the next several days, it seemed to me as if
everybody in the world was crying.
Dad, who had by now nearly completed his master’s
thesis, came home from Cornell to take over the lumber
mill, as Mama started teaching in our local school. Having
loved Grandpa so deeply myself, and having seen
Grandma’s terrible grief, she and I soon became extremely
close, and there weren’t many places she went that she
didn’t take me along with her.
I suppose it was somehow to try to fill the void of
Grandpa’s absence that now during each springtime,
Grandma began to invite various ones among the Murray
family female relatives to spend some, if not all, of the
summers with us. Averaging in her age range, the late
forties and early fifties, they came from exotic-sounding
places to me, such as Dyersburg, Tennessee; Inkster,
Michigan; St. Louis and Kansas City—and they had names
like Aunt Plus, Aunt Liz, Aunt Till, Aunt Viney, and Cousin
Georgia. With the supper dishes washed, they all would go
out on the front porch and sit in cane-bottomed rocking
chairs, and I would be among them and sort of scrunch
myself down behind the white-painted rocker holding
Grandma. The time would be just about as the dusk was
deepening into the night, with the lightning bugs flickering
on and off around the honeysuckle vines, and every evening
I can remember, unless there was some local priority

gossip, always they would talk about the same things—
snatches and patches of what later I’d learn was the long,
cumulative family narrative that had been passed down
across the generations.
It was the talk, I knew, that always had generated my only
memories of any open friction between Mama and
Grandma. Grandma would get on that subject sometimes
without her older women summer guests there, and Mama
always before long would abruptly snap something like,
“Oh, Maw, I wish you’d stop all that old-timey slavery stuff,
it’s entirely embarrassing!” Grandma would snap right
back, “If you don’t care who and where you come from,
well, I does!” And they might go around avoiding speaking
to each other for a whole day, maybe even longer.
But anyway, I know I gained my initial impression that
whatever Grandma and the other graying ladies talked
about was something that went a very long way back when
one or another of them would be recalling something of
girlhood and suddenly thrusting a finger down toward me
say, “I wasn’t any bigger’n this here young’un!” The very
idea that anyone as old and wrinkled as they had once
been my age strained my comprehension. But as I say, it
was this that caused me to realize that the things they were
discussing must have happened a very long time ago.
Being just a little boy, I couldn’t really follow most of what
they said. I didn’t know what an “ol’ massa” or an “ol’
missis” was; I didn’t know what a “plantation” was, though it
seemed something resembling a farm. But slowly, from
hearing the stories each passing summer, I began to
recognize frequently repeated names among the people
they talked about and to remember things they told about
those people. The farthest-back person they ever talked
about was a man they called “the African,” whom they
always said had been brought to this country on a ship to
some place that they pronounced “’Naplis.” They said he
was bought off this ship by a “Massa John Waller,” who had
a plantation in a place called “Spotsylvania County,
Virginia.” They would tell how the African kept trying to
escape, and how on the fourth effort he had the misfortune

to be captured by two white professional slave catchers,
who apparently decided to make an example of him. This
African was given the choice either of being castrated or
having a foot cut off, and—“thanks to Jesus, or we wouldn’t
be here tellin’ it”—the African chose his foot. I couldn’t
figure out why white folks would do anything as mean and
low-down as that.
But this African’s life, the old ladies said, had been
saved by Massa John’s brother, a Dr. William Waller, who
was so mad about the entirely unnecessary maiming that
he bought the African for his own plantation. Though now
the African was crippled, he could do limited work, and the
doctor assigned him in the vegetable garden. That was
how it happened that this particular African was kept on
one plantation for quite a long time—in a time when slaves,
especially male slaves, were sold back and forth so much
that slave children grew up often without even knowledge of
who their parents were.
Grandma and the others said that Africans fresh off slave
ships were given some name by their massas. In this
particular African’s case the name was “Toby.” But they
said anytime any of the other slaves called him that, he
would strenuously rebuff them, declaring that his name was
“Kin-tay.”
Hobbling about, doing his gardening work, then later
becoming his massa’s buggy-driver, “Toby”—or “Kin-tay”—
met and eventually mated with a woman slave there whom
Grandma and the other ladies called “Bell, the big-house
cook.” They had a little girl who was given the name “Kizzy.”
When she was around four to five years old, her African
father began to take her by the hand and lead her around,
whenever he got the chance, pointing out different things to
her and repeating to her their names in his own native
tongue. He would point at a guitar, for example, and say
something that sounded like “ko.” Or he would point at the
river than ran near the plantation—actually the Mattaponi
River—and say what sounded like “Kamby Bolongo,” along
with many more things and sounds. As Kizzy grew older,
and her African father learned English better, he began

telling her stories about himself, his people, and his
homeland—and how he was taken away from it. He said
that he had been out in the forest not far from his village,
chopping wood to make a drum, when he had been
surprised by four men, overwhelmed, and kidnaped into
slavery.
When Kizzy was sixteen years old, Grandma Palmer and
the other Murray family ladies said, she was sold away to a
new master named Tom Lea, who owned a smaller
plantation in North Carolina. And it was on this plantation
that Kizzy gave birth to a boy, whose father was Tom Lea,
who gave the boy the name of George.
When George got around four or five years old, his
mother began to tell him her African father’s sounds and
stories, until he came to know them well. Then when
George got to be the age of twelve, I learned there on
Grandma’s front porch, he was apprenticed to an old
“Uncle Mingo,” who trained the master’s fighting
gamecocks, and by the midteens, the youth had earned
such a reputation as a gamecock trainer that he’d been
given by others the nickname he’d take to his grave:
“Chicken George.”
Chicken George when around eighteen met and mated
with a slave girl named Matilda, who in time bore him eight
children. With each new child’s birth, said Grandma and the
others, Chicken George would gather his family within their
slave cabin, telling them afresh about their African greatgrandfather named “Kin-tay,” who called a guitar a “ ko,” a
river in Virginia “Kamby Bolongo,” and other sounds for
other things, and who had said he was chopping wood to
make a drum when he was captured into slavery.
The eight children grew up, took mates, and had their
own children. The fourth son, Tom, was a blacksmith when
he was sold along with the rest of his family to a “Massa
Murray,” who owned a tobacco plantation in Alamance
County, North Carolina. There, Tom met and mated with a
half-Indian slave girl named Irene, who came from the
plantation of a “Massa Holt,” who owned a cotton mill. Irene
eventually also bore eight children, and with each new birth,

Tom continued the tradition his father, Chicken George,
had begun, gathering his family around the hearth and
telling them about their African great-great-grandfather and
all those descending from him.
Of that second set of eight children, the youngest was a
little girl named Cynthia, who was two years old when her
father, Tom, and grandfather, Chicken George, led a
wagon train of recently freed slaves westward to Henning,
Tennessee, where Cynthia met and at the age of twentytwo married Will Palmer.
When I had been thoroughly immersed in listening to
accounts of all those people unseen who had lived away
back yonder, invariably it would astonish me when the long
narrative finally got down to Cynthia . . . and there I sat
looking right at Grandma! As well as Aunt Viney, Aunt
Matilda, and Aunt Liz, who had ridden right along with
Grandma—her older sisters—in the wagon train.
I was there at Grandma’s in Henning until two younger
brothers had been born, George in 1925, then Julius in
1929. Dad sold the lumber company for Grandma, and
moved now into being a professor of agriculture with Mama
and we three boys living wherever he taught, the longest
period being at A&M College at Normal, Alabama, where I
was in some class a morning in 1931 and someone came
with a message for me to hurry home, and I did, hearing
Dad’s great wracking sobs as I burst into the door. Mama
—who had been sick off and on since we had left Henning
—lay in their bed, dying. She was thirty-six.
Every summer, George, Julius, and I spent in Henning
with Grandma. Noticeably something of her old spirit
seemed to have gone, along with both Grandpa and Mama.
People passing would greet her in her white-painted rocker
there on the front porch, “Sister Cynthy, how’s you doin’?”
and she generally would answer them, “Jes’ settin’—”
After two years, Dad married again, to a colleague
professor who was named Zeona Hatcher, from Columbus,
Ohio, where she had gotten her master’s degree at Ohio
State University. She busied herself with the further raising
and training of we three rapidly growing boys, then she

gave us a sister named Lois.
I had finished a second year in college and at seventeen
years of age enlisted into the U. S. Coast Guard as a
messboy when World War II happened. On my cargoammunition ship plying the Southwest Pacific, I stumbled
onto the long road that has taken me finally to the writing of
this Roots.
At sea sometimes as long as three months, our crew’s
really most incessant fighting wasn’t of enemy aerial
bombers or submarines, but our fighting of sheer boredom.
At Dad’s insistence, I’d learned to type in high school, and
my most precious shipboard possession was my portable
typewriter. I wrote letters to everyone I could think of. And I
read every book in the ship’s small library or that was
owned and loaned by shipmates; from boyhood, I’d loved
reading, especially stories of adventure. Having read
everything on board a third time, I guess simply in
frustration I decided I’d try writing some stories myself. The
idea that one could roll a blank sheet of paper into a
typewriter and write something on it that other people would
care to read challenged, intrigued, exhilarated me—and
does to this day. I don’t know what else motivated and
sustained me through trying to write, every single night,
seven nights a week—mailing off my efforts to magazines
and collecting literally hundreds of their rejection slips—
across the next eight years before my first story was
bought.
After the war, with one or another editor accepting a story
now or then, the U. S. Coast Guard’s hierarchy created for
me a new rating—“journalist.” Writing every hour I could, I
got published more; finally in 1959 at age thirty-seven, I’d
been in the service for twenty years, making me eligible to
retire, which I did, determined to try now for a new career
as a full-time writer.
At first I sold some articles to men’s adventure
magazines, mostly about historic maritime dramas,
because I love the sea. Then Reader’s Digest began giving
me assignments to write mostly biographical stories of
people who’d had dramatic experiences or lived exciting

lives.
Then, in 1962, I happened to record a conversation with
famous jazz trumpeter Miles Davis that became the first of
the “Playboy Interviews.” Among my subsequent interview
subjects was the then-Nation of Islam spokesman Malcolm
X. A publisher reading the interview asked for a book
portraying his life. Malcolm X asked me to work with him as
his collaborator, and I did. The next year was mostly spent
intensively interviewing him, then the next year in actually
writing The Autobiography of Malcolm X, which, as he had
predicted, he hadn’t lived to read, for he was assassinated
about two weeks after the manuscript was finished.
Soon, a magazine sent me on an assignment to London.
Between appointments, utterly fascinated with a wealth of
history everywhere, I missed scarcely a guided tour
anywhere within London’s area during the next several
days. Poking about one day in the British Museum, I found
myself looking at something I’d heard of vaguely: the
Rosetta Stone. I don’t know why, it just about entranced me.
I got a book there in the museum library to learn more about
it.
Discovered in the Nile delta, I learned, the stone’s face
had chiseled into it three separate texts: one in known
Greek characters, the second in a then-unknown set of
characters, the third in the ancient hieroglyphics, which it
had been assumed no one ever would be able to translate.
But a French scholar, Jean Champollion, successively
matched, character for character, both the unknown text
and the hieroglyphics with the known Greek text, and he
offered a thesis that the texts read the same. Essentially, he
had cracked the mystery of the previously undeciphered
hieroglyphics in which much of mankind’s earliest history
was recorded.
The key that had unlocked a door into the past fascinated
me. I seemed to feel it had some special personal
significance, but I couldn’t imagine what. It was on a plane
returning to the United States when an idea hit me. Using
language chiseled into stone, the French scholar had
deciphered a historic unknown by matching it with that

which was known. That presented me a rough analogy: In
the oral history that Grandma, Aunt Liz, Aunt Plus, Cousin
Georgia, and the others had always told on the boyhood
Henning front porch, I had an unknown quotient in those
strange words or sounds passed on by the African. I got to
thinking about them: “Kin-tay,” he had said, was his name.
“Ko” he had called a guitar. “Kamby Bolongo” he had called
a river in Virginia. They were mostly sharp, angular sounds,
w i t h k predominating. These sounds probably had
undergone some changes across the generations of being
passed down, yet unquestionably they represented
phonetic snatches of whatever was the specific tongue
spoken by my African ancestor who was a family legend.
My plane from London was circling to land at New York with
me wondering: What specific African tongue was it? Was
there any way in the world that maybe I could find out?

CHAPTER 119
Now over thirty years later the sole surviving one of the old
ladies who had talked the family narrative on the Henning
front porch was the youngest among them, Cousin Georgia
Anderson. Grandma was gone, and all of the others too. In
her eighties now, Cousin Georgia lived with her son and
daughter, Floyd Anderson and Bea Neely, at 1200 Everett
Avenue, Kansas City, Kansas. I hadn’t seen her since my
frequent visits there of a few years before, then to offer what
help I could to my politically oriented brother, George.
Successively out of the U. S. Army Air Force, Morehouse
College, then the University of Arkansas Law School,
George was hotly campaigning to become a Kansas state
senator. The night of his victory party, laughter flourished
that actually why he’d won was . . . Cousin Georgia. Having
repetitively heard her campaign director son, Floyd, tell
people of George’s widely recognized integrity, our
beloved gray, bent, feisty Cousin Georgia had taken to the
local sidewalks. Rapping her walking cane at people’s
doors, she had thrust before their startled faces a picture of
her grandnephew candidate, declaring, “Dat boy got
mo’’teggity dan you can shake a stick at!”
Now I flew to Kansas City again, to see Cousin Georgia.
I think that I will never quite get over her instant response
when I raised the subject of the family story. Wrinkled and
ailing, she jerked upright in her bed, her excitement like
boyhood front-porch echoes:
“Yeah, boy, dat African say his name was ‘Kin-tay’! . . .
He say de guitar a ‘ko,’ de river ‘Kamby Bolongo,’ an’ he
was choppin’ wood to make hisself a drum when dey
cotched ’im!”
Cousin Georgia became so emotionally full of the old
family story that Floyd, Bea, and I had a time trying to calm
her down. I explained to her that I wanted to try to see if
there was any way that I could possibly find where our “Kintay” had come from . . . which could reveal our ancestral

tribe.
“You go ’head, boy!” exclaimed Cousin Georgia. “Yo’
sweet grandma an’ all of ’em—dey up dere watchin’ you!”
The thought made me feel something like . . . My God!

CHAPTER 120
Soon after, I went to the National Archives in Washington,
D.C., and told a reading-room desk attendant that I was
interested in Alamance County, North Carolina, census
records just after the Civil War. Rolls of microfilm were
delivered. I began turning film through the machine, feeling
a mounting sense of intrigue while viewing an endless
parade of names recorded in that old-fashioned
penmanship of different 1800s census takers. After several
of the long microfilm rolls, tiring, suddenly in utter
astonishment I found myself looking down there on: “Tom
Murray, black, blacksmith—,” “Irene Murray, black,
housewife—” . . . followed by the names of Grandma’s
older sisters—most of whom I’d listened to countless times
on Grandma’s front porch. “Elizabeth, age 6”—nobody in
the world but my Great Aunt Liz! At the time of that census,
Grandma wasn’t even born yet!
It wasn’t that I hadn’t believed the stories of Grandma and
the rest of them. You just didn’t not believe my grandma. It
was simply so uncanny sitting staring at those names
actually right there in official U. S. Government records.
Then living in New York, I returned to Washington as
often as I could manage it—searching in the National
Archives, in the Library of Congress, in the Daughters of
the American Revolution Library. Wherever I was, whenever
black library attendants perceived the nature of my search,
documents I’d requested would reach me with a miraculous
speed. From one or another source during 1966, I was able
to document at least the highlights of the cherished family
story; I would have given anything to be able to tell
Grandma—then I would remember what Cousin Georgia
had said, that she, all of them, were “up there watchin’.”
Now the thing was where, what, how could I pursue those
strange phonetic sounds that it was always said our African
ancestor had spoken. It seemed obvious that I had to reach
as wide a range of actual Africans as I possibly could,

simply because so many different tribal tongues are
spoken in Africa. There in New York City, I began doing
what seemed logical: I began arriving at the United Nations
around quitting time; the elevators were spilling out people
who were thronging through the lobby on their way home. It
wasn’t hard to spot the Africans, and every one I was able
to stop, I’d tell my sounds to. Within a couple of weeks, I
guess I had stopped about two dozen Africans, each of
whom had given me a quick look, a quick listen, and then
took off. I can’t say I blame them—me trying to
communicate some African sounds in a Tennessee accent.
Increasingly frustrated, I had a long talk with George
Sims, with whom I’d grown up in Henning, and who is a
master researcher. After a few days, George brought me a
list of about a dozen people academically renowned for
their knowledge of African linguistics. One whose
background intrigued me quickly was a Belgian Dr. Jan
Vansina. After study at the University of London’s School of
African and Oriental Studies, he had done his early work
living in African villages and written a book called La
Tradition Orale. I telephoned Dr. Vansina where he now
taught at the University of Wisconsin, and he gave me an
appointment to see him. It was a Wednesday morning that I
flew to Madison, Wisconsin, motivated by my intense
curiosity about some strange phonetic sounds . . . and with
no dream in this world of what was about to start
happening....
That evening in the Vansinas’ living room, I told him every
syllable I could remember of the family narrative heard
since little boyhood—recently buttressed by Cousin
Georgia in Kansas City. Dr. Vansina, after listening intently
throughout, then began asking me questions. Being an oral
historian, he was particularly interested in the physical
transmission of the narrative down across generations.
We talked so late that he invited me to spend the night,
and the next morning Dr. Vansina, with a very serious
expression on his face, said, “I wanted to sleep on it. The
ramifications of phonetic sounds preserved down across
your family’s generations can be immense.” He said that he

had been on the phone with a colleague Africanist, Dr.
Philip Curtin; they both felt certain that the sounds I’d
conveyed to him were from the “Mandinka” tongue. I’d
never heard that word; he told me that it was the language
spoken by the Mandingo people. Then he guess translated
certain of the sounds. One of them probably meant cow or
cattle, another probably meant the baobab tree, generic in
West Africa. The word ko, he said, could refer to the kora,
one of the Mandingo people’s oldest stringed instruments,
made of a halved large dried gourd covered with goatskin,
with a long neck, and twenty-one strings with a bridge. An
enslaved Mandingo might relate the kora visually to some
among the types of stringed instruments that U.S. slaves
had.
The most involved sound I had heard and brought was
Kamby Bolongo, my ancestor’s sound to his daughter Kizzy
as he had pointed to the Mattaponi River in Spotsylvania
County, Virginia. Dr. Vansina said that without question,
bolongo meant, in the Mandinka tongue, a moving water,
as a river, preceded by “Kamby,” it could indicate the
Gambia River.
I’d never heard of it.
An incident happened that would build my feeling—
especially as more uncanny things occurred—that, yes,
they were up there watchin’ ...
I was asked to speak at a seminar held at Utica College,
Utica, New York. Walking down a hallway with the professor
who had invited me, I said I’d just flown in from Washington
and why I’d been there. “The Gambia? If I’m not mistaken,
someone mentioned recently that an outstanding student
from that country is over at Hamilton.”
The old, distinguished Hamilton College was maybe a
half hour’s drive away, in Clinton, New York. Before I could
finish asking, a Professor Charles Todd said, “You’re
talking about Ebou Manga.” Consulting a course roster, he
told me where I could find him in an agricultural economics
class. Ebou Manga was small of build, with careful eyes, a
reserved manner, and black as soot. He tentatively
confirmed my sounds, clearly startled to have heard me

uttering them. Was Mandinka his home tongue? “No,
although I am familiar with it.” He was a Wolof, he said. In
his dormitory room, I told him about my quest. We left for
The Gambia at the end of the following week.
Arriving in Dakar, Senegal, the next morning, we caught
a light plane to small Yundum Airport in The Gambia. In a
passenger van, we rode into the capital city of Banjul (then
Bathurst). Ebou and his father, Alhaji Manga—Gambians
are mostly Moslem—assembled a small group of men
knowledgeable in their small country’s history, who met with
me in the lounge of the Atlantic Hotel. As I had told Dr.
Vansina in Wisconsin, I told these men the family narrative
that had come down across the generations. I told them in a
reverse progression, backward from Grandma through
Tom, Chicken George, then Kizzy saying how her African
father insisted to other slaves that his name was “Kin-tay,”
and repetitively told her phonetic sounds identifying various
things, along with stories such as that he had been
attacked and seized while not far from his village, chopping
wood.
When I had finished, they said almost with wry
amusement, “Well, of course ‘Kamby Bolongo’ would mean
Gambia River; anyone would know that.” I told them hotly
that no, a great many people wouldn’t know it! Then they
showed a much greater interest that my 1760s ancestor
had insisted his name was “Kin-tay.” “Our country’s oldest
villages tend to be named for the families that settled those
villages centuries ago,” they said. Sending for a map,
pointing, they said, “Look, here is the village of KinteKundah. And not too far from it, the village of Kinte-Kundah
Janneh-Ya.”
Then they told me something of which I’d never have
dreamed: of very old men, called griots, still to be found in
the older backcountry villages, men who were in effect
living, walking archives of oral history. A senior griot would
be a man usually in his late sixties or early seventies; below
him would be progressively younger griots—and
apprenticing boys, so a boy would be exposed to those
griots’ particular line of narrative for forty or fifty years

before he could qualify as a senior griot, who told on
special occasions the centuries-old histories of villages, of
clans, of families, of great heroes. Throughout the whole of
black Africa such oral chronicles had been handed down
since the time of the ancient forefathers, I was informed,
and there were certain legendary griots who could narrate
facets of African history literally for as long as three days
without ever repeating themselves.
Seeing how astounded I was, these Gambian men
reminded me that every living person ancestrally goes back
to some time and some place where no writing existed;
and then human memories and mouths and ears were the
only ways those human beings could store and relay
information. They said that we who live in the Western
culture are so conditioned to the “crutch of print” that few
among us comprehend what a trained memory is capable
of.
Since my forefather had said his name was “Kin-tay”—
properly spelled “Kinte,” they said—and since the Kinte
clan was old and well known in The Gambia, they promised
to do what they could to find a griot who might be able to
assist my search.
Back in the United States, I began devouring books on
African history. It grew quickly into some kind of obsession
to correct my ignorance concerning the earth’s secondlargest continent. It embarrasses me to this day that up to
then my images about Africa had been largely derived or
inferred from Tarzan movies and my very little authentic
knowledge had come from only occasional leafings through
t h e National Geographic. All of a sudden now, after
reading all day, I’d sit on the edge of my bed at night
studying a map of Africa, memorizing the different
countries’ relative positions and the principal waters where
slave ships had operated.
After some weeks, a registered letter came from The
Gambia; it suggested that when possible, I should come
back. But by now I was stony broke—especially because
I’d been investing very little of my time in writing.
Once at a Reader’s Digest lawn party, cofounder Mrs.

Dewit Wallace had told me how much she liked an
“Unforgettable Character” I had written—about a tough old
seadog cook who had once been my boss in the U. S.
Coast Guard—and before leaving, Mrs. Wallace
volunteered that I should let her know if I ever needed some
help. Now I wrote to Mrs. Wallace a rather embarrassed
letter, briefly telling her the compulsive quest I’d gotten
myself into. She asked some editors to meet with me and
see what they felt, and invited to lunch with them, I talked
about nonstop for nearly three hours. Shortly afterward, a
letter told me that the Reader’s Digest would provide me
with a three-hundred-dollar monthly check for one year, and
plus that—my really vital need—“reasonable necessary
travel expenses.”
I again visited Cousin Georgia in Kansas City—
something had urged me to do so, and I found her quite ill.
But she was thrilled to hear both what I had learned and
what I hoped to learn. She wished me Godspeed, and I flew
then to Africa.
The same men with whom I had previously talked told me
now in a rather matter-of-fact manner that they had caused
word to be put out in the back country, and that a griot very
knowledgeable of the Kinte clan had indeed been found—
his name, they said, was “Kebba Kanji Fofana.” I was ready
to have a fit. “Where is he?” They looked at me oddly. “He’s
in his village.”
I discovered that if I intended to see this griot, I was going
to have to do something I’d never have dreamed I’d ever be
doing—organizing what seemed, at least to me then, a kind
of minisafari! It took me three days of negotiating through
unaccustomed endless African palaver finally to hire a
launch to get upriver; to rent a lorry and a Land-Rover to
take supplies by a roundabout land route; to hire finally a
total of fourteen people, including three interpreters and
four musicians, who had told me that the old griots in the
back country wouldn’t talk without music in the background.
In the launch Baddibu, vibrating up the wide, swift
“Kamby Bolongo,” I felt queasily, uncomfortably alien. Did
they all have me appraised as merely another pith helmet?

Finally ahead was James Island, for two centuries the site
of a fort over which England and France waged war back
and forth for the ideal vantage point to trade in slaves.
Asking if we might land there awhile, I trudged amid the
crumbling ruins yet guarded by ghostly cannon. Picturing in
my mind the kinds of atrocities that would have happened
there, I felt as if I would like to go flailing an ax back through
that facet of black Africa’s history. Without luck I tried to find
for myself some symbol remnant of an ancient chain, but I
took a chunk of mortar and a brick. In the next minutes
before we returned to the Baddibu, I just gazed up and
down that river that my ancestor had named for his
daughter far across the Atlantic Ocean in Spotsylvania
County, Virginia. Then we went on, and upon arriving at a
little village called Albreda, we put ashore, our destination
now on foot the yet smaller village of Juffure, where the men
had been told that this griot lived.
There is an expression called “the peak experience”—
that which emotionally, nothing in your life ever transcends.
I’ve had mine, that first day in the back country of black
West Africa.
When we got within sight of Juffure, the children who
were playing outside gave the alert, and the people came
flocking from their huts. It’s a village of only about seventy
people. Like most backcountry villages, it was still very
much as it was two hundred years ago, with its circular mud
houses and their conical thatched roofs! Among the people
as they gathered was a small man wearing an off white
robe, a pillbox hat over an aquiline-featured black face, and
about him was an aura of “somebodiness” until I knew he
was the man we had come to see and hear.
As the three interpreters left our party to converge upon
him, the seventy-odd other villagers gathered closely
around me, in a kind of horseshoe pattern, three or four
deep all around; had I stuck out my arms, my fingers would
have touched the nearest ones on either side. They were all
staring at me. The eyes just raked me. Their foreheads
were furrowed with their very intensity of staring. A kind of
visceral surging or a churning sensation started up deep

inside me; bewildered, I was wondering what on earth was
this ... then in a little while it was rather as if some full-gale
force of realization rolled in on me: Many times in my life I
had been among crowds of people, but never where every

one was jet black!
Rocked emotionally, my eyes dropped downward as we
tend to do when we’re uncertain, insecure, and my glance
fell upon my own hands’ brown complexion. This time more
quickly than before, and even harder, another gale-force
emotion hit me: I felt myself some variety of a hybrid ... I felt
somehow impure among the pure; it was a terribly shaming
feeling. About then, abruptly the old man left the
interpreters. The people immediately also left me now to go
crowding about him.
One of my interpreters came up quickly and whispered in
my ears, “They stare at you so much because they have
never here seen a black American.” When I grasped the
significance, I believe that hit me harder than what had
already happened. They hadn’t been looking at me as an
individual, but I represented in their eyes a symbol of the
twenty-five millions of us black people whom they had never
seen, who lived beyond an ocean.
The people were clustered thickly about the old man, all
of them intermittently flicking glances toward me as they
talked animatedly in their Mandinka tongue. After a while,
the old man turned, walked briskly through the people, past
my three interpreters, and right up to me. His eyes piercing
into mine, seeming to feel I should understand his
Mandinka, he expressed what they had all decided they felt
concerning those unseen millions of us who lived in those
places that had been slave ships’ destinations—and the
translation came: “We have been told by the forefathers that
there are many of us from this place who are in exile in that
place called America—and in other places.”
The old man sat down, facing me, as the people hurriedly
gathered behind him. Then he began to recite for me the
ancestral history of the Kinte clan, as it had been passed
along orally down across centuries from the forefathers’
time. It was not merely conversational, but more as if a

scroll were being read; for the still, silent villagers, it was
clearly a formal occasion. The griot would speak, bending
forward from the waist, his body rigid, his neck cords
standing out, his words seeming almost physical objects.
After a sentence or two, seeming to go limp, he would lean
back, listening to an interpreter’s translation. Spilling from
the griot’s head came an incredibly complex Kinte clan
lineage that reached back across many generations: who
married whom; who had what children, what children then
married whom; then their offspring. It was all just
unbelievable. I was struck not only by the profusion of
details, but also by the narrative’s biblical style, something
like: “—and so-and-so took as a wife so-and-so, and begat
. . . and begat . . . and begat ...” He would next name each
begat’s eventual spouse, or spouses, and their averagely
numerous offspring, and so on. To date things the griot
linked them to events, such as “—in the year of the big
water”—a flood—“he slew a water buffalo.” To determine
the calendar date, you’d have to find out when that
particular flood occurred.
Simplifying to its essence the encyclopedic saga that I
was told, the griot said that the Kinte clan had begun in the
country called Old Mali. Then the Kinte men traditionally
were blacksmiths, “who had conquered fire,” and the
women mostly were potters and weavers. In time, one
branch of the clan moved into the country called
Mauretania; and it was from Mauretania that one son of this
clan, whose name was Kairaba Kunta Kinte—a marabout,
or holy man of the Moslem faith—journeyed down into the
country called The Gambia. He went first to a village called
Pakali N’Ding, stayed there for a while, then went to a
village called Jiffarong, and then to the village of Juffure.
In Juffure, Kairaba Kunta Kinte took his first wife, a
Mandinka maiden whose name was Sireng. And by her he
begot two sons, whose names were Janneh and Saloum.
Then he took a second wife; her name was Yaisa. And by
Yaisa, he begot a son named Omoro.
Those three sons grew up in Juffure until they became of
age. Then the elder two, Janneh and Saloum, went away

and founded a new village called Kinte-Kundah Janneh-Ya.
The youngest son, Omoro, stayed on in Juffure village until
he had thirty rains—years—of age, then he took as his wife
a Mandinka maiden named Binta Kebba. And by Binta
Kebba, roughly between the years 1750 and 1760, Omoro
Kinte begat four sons, whose names were, in the order of
their birth, Kunta, Lamin, Suwadu, and Madi.
The old griot had talked for nearly two hours up to then,
and perhaps fifty times the narrative had included some
detail about someone whom he had named. Now after he
had just named those four sons, again he appended a
detail, and the interpreter translated—
“About the time the King’s soldiers came”—another of
the griot’s time-fixing references—“the eldest of these four
sons, Kunta, went away from his village to chop wood . . .
and he was never seen again. . . . ” And the griot went on
with his narrative.
I sat as if I were carved of stone. My blood seemed to
have congealed. This man whose lifetime had been in this
back-country African village had no way in the world to
know that he had just echoed what I had heard all through
my boyhood years on my grandma’s front porch in Henning,
Tennessee . . . of an African who always had insisted that
his name was “Kin-tay”, who had called a guitar a “ko,” and
a river within the state of Virginia, “Kamby Bolongo”; and
who had been kidnaped into slavery while not far from his
village, chopping wood, to make himself a drum.
I managed to fumble from my dufflebag my basic
notebook, whose first pages containing grandma’s story I
showed to an interpreter. After briefly reading, clearly
astounded, he spoke rapidly while showing it to the old
griot, who became agitated, he got up, exclaiming to the
people, gesturing at my notebook in the interpreter’s hands,
and they all got agitated.
I don’t remember hearing anyone giving an order, I only
recall becoming aware that those seventy-odd people had
formed a wide human ring around me, moving
counterclockwise, chanting softly, loudly, softly; their bodies
close together, they were lifting their knees high, stamping

up reddish puffs of the dust....
The woman who broke from the moving circle was one of
about a dozen whose infant children were within cloth slings
across their backs. Her jet-black face deeply contorting, the
woman came charging toward me, her bare feet slapping
the earth, and snatching her baby free, she thrust it at me
almost roughly, the gesture saying “Take it!” . . . and I did,
clasping the baby to me. Then she snatched away her
baby; and another woman was thrusting her baby, then
another, and another . . . until I had embraced probably a
dozen babies. I wouldn’t learn until maybe a year later, from
a Harvard University professor, Dr. Jerome Bruner, a
scholar of such matters, “You didn’t know you were
participating in one of the oldest ceremonies of humankind,
called ‘The laying on of hands’! In their way, they were
telling you ‘Through this flesh, which is us, we are you, and
you are us!’”
Later the men of Juffure took me into their mosque built
of bamboo and thatch, and they prayed around me in
Arabic. I remember thinking, down on my knees, “After I’ve
found out where I came from, I can’t understand a word
they’re saying.” Later the crux of their prayer was translated
for me: “Praise be to Allah for one long lost from us whom
Allah has returned.”
Since we had come by the river, I wanted to return by
land. As I sat beside the wiry young Mandingo driver who
was leaving dust pluming behind us on the hot, rough,
pitted, back-country road toward Banjul, there came from
somewhere into my head a staggering awareness . . . that
if any black American could be so blessed as I had been to
know only a few ancestral clues—could he or she know who
was either the paternal or maternal African ancestor or
ancestors, and about where that ancestor lived when taken,
and finally about when the ancestor was taken—then only
those few clues might well see that black American able to
locate some wizened old black griot whose narrative could
reveal the black American’s ancestral clan, perhaps even
the very village.
In my mind’s eye, rather as if it were mistily being

projected on a screen, I began envisioning descriptions I
had read of how collectively millions of our ancestors had
been enslaved. Many thousands were individually
kidnaped, as my own forebear Kunta had been, but into the
millions had come awake screaming in the night, dashing
out into the bedlam of raided villages, which were often in
flames. The captured able survivors were linked neck-byneck with thongs into processions called “coffles,” which
were sometimes as much as a mile in length. I envisioned
the many dying, or left to die when they were too weak to
continue the torturous march toward the coast, and those
who made it to the beach were greased, shaved, probed in
every orifice, often branded with sizzling irons; I envisioned
them being lashed and dragged toward the longboats, their
spasms of screaming and clawing with their hands into the
beach, biting up great choking mouthfuls of the sand in their
desperation efforts for one last hold on the Africa that had
been their home; I envisioned them shoved, beaten, jerked
down into slave ships’ stinking holds and chained onto
shelves, often packed so tightly that they had to lie on their
sides like spoons in a drawer . . . .
My mind reeled with it all as we approached another,
much larger village. Staring ahead, I realized that word of
what had happened in Juffure must have left there well
before I did. The driver slowing down, I could see this
village’s people thronging the road ahead; they were
waving, amid their cacophony of crying out something; I
stood up in the Land-Rover, waving back as they seemed
grudging to open a path for the Land-Rover.
I guess we had moved a third of the way through the
village when it suddenly registered in my brain what they
were all crying out ... the wizened, robed elders and
younger men, the mothers and the naked tar-black children,
they were all waving up at me, their expressions buoyant,
beaming, all were crying out together, “ Meester Kinte!
Meester Kinte!”
Let me tell you something: I am a man. A sob hit me
somewhere around my ankles; it came surging upward,
and flinging my hands over my face, I was just bawling, as I

hadn’t since I was a baby. “ Meester Kinte!” I just felt like I
was weeping for all of history’s incredible atrocities against
fellowmen, which seems to be mankind’s greatest flaw . . . .
Flying homeward from Dakar, I decided to write a book.
My own ancestors’ would automatically also be a symbolic
saga of all African-descent people—who are without
exception the seeds of someone like Kunta who was born
and grew up in some black African village, someone who
was captured and chained down in one of those slave
ships that sailed them across the same ocean, into some
succession of plantations, and since then a struggle for
freedom.
In New York, my waiting telephone messages included
that in a Kansas City Hospital, our eighty-three-year-old
Cousin Georgia had died. Later, making a time-zone
adjustment, I discovered that she passed away within the
very hour that I had walked into Juffure Village. I think that
as the last of the old ladies who talked the story on
Grandma’s front porch, it had been her job to get me to
Africa, then she went to join the others up there watchin’.
In fact, I see starting from my little boyhood, a succession
of related occurrences that finally when they all joined have
caused this book to exist. Grandma and the others drilled
the family story into me. Then, purely by the fluke of
circumstances, when I was cooking on U. S. Coast Guard
ships at sea, I began the long trial-and-error process of
teaching myself to write. And because I had come to love
the sea, my early writing was about dramatic sea
adventures gleaned out of yellowing old maritime records in
the U. S. Coast Guard’s Archives. I couldn’t have acquired
a much better preparation to meet the maritime research
challenges that this book would bring.
Always, Grandma and the other old ladies had said that
a ship brought the African to “somewhere called ’Naplis.” I
knew they had to have been referring to Annapolis,
Maryland. So I felt now that I had to try to see if I could find
what ship had sailed to Annapolis from the Gambia River,
with her human cargo including “the African,” who would
later insist that “Kin-tay” was his name, after his massa

John Waller had given him the name “Toby.”
I needed to determine a time around which to focus
search for this ship. Months earlier, in the village of Juffure,
the griot had timed Kunta Kinte’s capture with “about the
time the King’s soldiers came.”
Returning to London, midway during a second week of
searching in records of movement assignments for British
military units during the 1760s, I finally found that “King’s
soldiers” had to refer to a unit called “Colonel O’Hare’s
forces.” The unit was sent from London in 1767 to guard the
then British-operated Fort James Slave Fort in the Gambia
River. The griot had been so correct that I felt embarrassed
that, in effect, I had been checking behind him.
I went to Lloyds of London. In the office of an executive
named Mr. R. C. E. Landers, it just poured out of me what I
was trying to do. He got up from behind his desk and he
said, “Young man, Lloyds of London will give you all of the
help that we can.” It was a blessing, for through Lloyds,
doors began to be opened for me to search among myriad
old English maritime records.
I can’t remember any more exhausting experience than
my first six weeks of seemingly endless, futile, day-afterday searching in an effort to isolate and then pin down a
specific slave ship on a specific voyage, from within
cartons upon cartons, files upon files of old records of
thousands of slave-ship triangular voyages among
England, Africa, and America. Along with my frustration, the
more a rage grew within me the more I perceived to what
degree the slave trade, in its time, was regarded by most of
its participants simply as another major industry, rather like
the buying, selling, and shipment of livestock today. Many
records seemed never to have been opened after their
original storage; apparently no one had felt occasion to go
through them.
I hadn’t found a single ship bound from The Gambia to
Annapolis, when in the seventh week, one afternoon about
two-thirty, I was studying the 1,023rd sheet of slave-ship
records. A wide rectangular sheet, it recorded the Gambia
River entrances and exits of some thirty ships during the

years 1766 and 1767. Moving down the list, my eyes
reached ship No. 18, and automatically scanned across its
various data heading entries.
On July 5, 1767—the year “the King’s soldiers came”—a
ship named Lord Ligonier, her captain, a Thomas E.
Davies, had sailed from the Gambia River, her destination
Annapolis . . . .
I don’t know why, but oddly my internal emotional reaction
was delayed. I recall passively writing down the information,
I turned in the records, and walked outside. Around the
corner was a little tea shop. I went in and ordered a tea and
cruller. Sitting, sipping my tea, it suddenly hit me that quite
possibly that ship brought Kunta Kinte!
I still owe the lady for the tea and cruller. By telephone,
Pan American confirmed their last seat available that day
to New York. There simply wasn’t time to go by the hotel
where I was staying; I told a tax driver, “Heathrow Airport!”
Sleepless through that night’s crossing of the Atlantic, I was
seeing in my mind’s eye the book in the Library of
Congress, Washington, D.C., that I had to get my hands on
again. It had a light brown cover, with darker brown letters
—Shipping in the Port of Annapolis, by Vaughan W.
Brown.
From New York, the Eastern Airlines shuttle took me to
Washington; I taxied to the Library of Congress, ordered
the book, almost yanked it from the young man who brought
it, and went riffling through it . . . and there it was,
confirmation! The Lord Ligonier had cleared Annapolis’
customs officials on September 29, 1767.
Renting a car, speeding to Annapolis, I went to the
Maryland Hall of Records and asked archivist Mrs. Phebe
Jacobsen for copies of any local newspaper published
around the first week of October 1767. She soon produced
a microfilm roll of the Maryland Gazette. At the projection
machine, I was halfway through the October 1 issue when I
saw the advertisement in the antique typeface: “JUST
IMPORTED, In the ship Lord Ligonier, Capt. Davies, from
the River Gambia, in Africa, and to be sold by the
subscribers, in Annapolis, for cash, or good bills of

exchange on Wednesday the 7th of October next, A Cargo
of CHOICE HEALTHY SLAVES. The said ship will take
tobacco to London on liberty at 6s. Sterling per ton.” The
advertisement was signed by John Ridout and Daniel of St.
Thos. Jenifer.
On September 29, 1967, I felt I should be nowhere else
in the world except standing on a pier at Annapolis—and I
was; it was two hundred years to the day after the Lord
Ligonier had landed. Staring out to seaward across those
waters over which my great-great-great-great-grandfather
had been brought, again I found myself weeping.
The 1766-67 document compiled at James Fort in the
Gambia River had included that the Lord Ligonier had
sailed with 140 slaves in her hold. How many of them had
lived through the voyage? Now on a second mission in the
Maryland Hall of Records, I searched to find a record of the
ship’s cargo listed upon her arrival in Annapolis—and
found it, the following inventory, in old-fashioned script:
3,265 “elephants’ teeth,” as ivory tusks were called; 3,700
pounds of beeswax; 800 pounds of raw cotton; 32 ounces
of Gambian gold; and 98 “Negroes.” Her loss of 42
Africans en route, or around one third, was average for
slaving voyages.
I realized by this time that Grandma, Aunt Liz, Aunt Plus,
and Cousin Georgia also had been griots in their own
ways. My notebooks contained their centuries-old story that
our African had been sold to “Massa John Waller,” who had
given him the name “Toby.” During his fourth escape effort,
when cornered he had wounded with a rock one of the pair
of professional slave-catchers who caught him, and they
had cut his foot off. “Massa John’s brother, Dr. William
Waller,” had saved the slave’s life, then indignant at the
maiming, had bought him from his brother. I dared to hope
there might actually exist some kind of an actual
documenting record.
I went to Richmond, Virginia. I pored through microfilmed
legal deeds filed within Spotsylvania County, Virginia, after
September 1767, when the Lord Ligonier had landed. In
time, I found a lengthy deed dated September 5, 1768, in

which John Waller and his wife Ann transferred to William
Waller land and goods, including 240 acres of farmland ...
and then on the second page, “and also one Negro man
slave named Toby.”
My God!
In the twelve years since my visit to the Rosetta Stone, I
have traveled half a million miles, I suppose, searching,
sifting, checking, crosschecking, finding out more and more
about the people whose respective oral histories had
proved not only to be correct, but even to connect on both
sides of the ocean. Finally I managed to tear away from yet
more researching in order to push myself into actually
writing this book. To develop Kunta Kinte’s boyhood and
youth took me a long time, and having come to know him
well, I anguished upon his capture. When I began trying to
write of his, or all of those Gambians’ slave-ship crossing,
finally I flew to Africa and canvassed among shipping lines
to obtain passage on the first possible freighter sailing from
any black African port directly to the United States. It turned
out to be the Farrell Lines’ African Star. When we put to
sea, I explained what I hoped to do that might help me write
of my ancestor’s crossing. After each late evening’s dinner,
I climbed down successive metal ladders into her deep,
dark, cold cargo hold. Stripping to my underwear, I lay on
my back on a wide rough bare dunnage plank and forced
myself to stay there through all ten nights of the crossing,
trying to imagine what did he see, hear, feel, smell, taste—
and above all, in knowing Kunta, what things did he think?
My crossing of course was ludicrously luxurious by any
comparison to the ghastly ordeal endured by Kunta Kinte,
his companions, and all those other millions who lay
chained and shackled in terror and their own filth for an
average of eighty to ninety days, at the end of which
awaited new physical and psychic horrors. But anyway,
finally I wrote of the ocean crossing—from the perspective
of the human cargo.
Finally I’ve woven our whole seven generations into this
book that is in your hands. In the years of the writing, I have
also spoken before many audiences of how Roots came to

be, naturally now and then someone asks, “How much of
Roots is fact and how much is fiction?” To the best of my
knowledge and of my effort, every lineage statement within
Roots is from either my African or American families’
carefully preserved oral history, much of which I have been
able conventionally to corroborate with documents. Those
documents, along with the myriad textural details of what
were contemporary indigenous lifestyles, cultural history,
and such that give Roots flesh have come from years of
intensive research in fifty-odd libraries, archives, and other
repositories on three continents.
Since I wasn’t yet around when most of the story
occurred, by far most of the dialogue and most of the
incidents are of necessity a novelized amalgam of what I
know took place together with what my researching led me
to plausibly feel took place.
I think now that not only are Grandma, Cousin Georgia,
and those other ladies “up there watchin’,” but so are all of
the others: Kunta and Bell; Kizzy; Chicken George and
Matilda; Tom and Irene, Grandpa Will Palmer; Bertha;
Mama—and now, as well, the most recent one to join them,
Dad . . . .
He was eighty-three. When his children—George, Julius,
Lois, and I—had discussed the funeral arrangements,
some one of us expressed that Dad had lived both a full life
and a rich one in the way that he interpreted richness.
Moreover, he had gone quickly without suffering, and
knowing Dad as well as we all did, we agreed that he would
not have wanted us going about crying. And we agreed that
we would not.
I found myself so full of the memories that when the
mortician said “the deceased,” it startled me that he meant
our dad, around whom things rarely got dull. Shortly before
the first service that was held for him in a Washington, D.C.,
chapel thick with family friends, my brother George told the
Reverend Boyd, who was in charge, that at an appropriate
point, we sons would like to share some memories of Dad
with the friends there.
So after brief conventional services, a favorite song of

Dad’s was sung, then George got up and stood near the
open casket. He said he vividly recalled that wherever Dad
had taught, our home was always shared with at least one
youth whose rural farmer father Dad had talked into letting
his son attend college, the “no money” protest being solved
by Dad’s saying, “He’ll live with us.” As a result, George
estimated that about the South were around eighteen
county agricultural agents, high school principals, and
teachers who proudly call themselves “’Fessor Haley’s
boys.”
George said that among earlier memory was once when
we lived in Alabama and at breakfast Dad said, “You boys
come on, there’s a great man I want you to meet.” And just
like that Dad drove us three boys the several hours to
Tuskeegee, Alabama, where we visited the mysterious
laboratory of the small, dark genius scientist, Dr. George
Washington Carver, who talked to us about the need to
study hard and gave us each a small flower. George said
that in Dad’s later years, he had been irked that we did not
hold annual large family reunions as he would have liked,
and George asked the audience now to join us in feeling
that really we were holding a reunion both for and with our
dad.
I got up as George took his seat, and going over, looking
at Dad, I said to the people that being the oldest child, I
could remember things farther back about the gentleman
lying there. For instance, my first distinct boyhood
impression of love was noticing how Dad’s and Mama’s
eyes would look at each other over the pianotop when
Mama was playing some little introduction as Dad stood
near waiting to sing in our church. Another early memory
was of how I could always get a nickel or even a dime from
Dad, no matter how tight people were going around saying
things were. All I had to do was catch him alone and start
begging him to tell me just one more time about how his
AEF 92nd Division, 366th Infantry, fought in the Meuse
Argonne Forest. “Why, we were ferocious, son!” Dad would
exclaim. By the time he gave me the dime it was clear that
whenever things would look really grim to General

Blackjack Pershing, once again he would send a courier to
bring Savannah, Tennessee’s, Sargeant Simon A. Haley
(No. 2816106), whereupon the lurking German spies sped
that news to their highest command, throwing fright into the
Kaiser himself.
But it seemed to me, I told the people, that after Dad’s
having met Mama at Lane College, his next most fateful
meeting for all of us had been when Dad had transferred to
A&T College in Greensboro, North Carolina, and was
about to drop out of school and return home to sharecrop,
“Because, boys, working four odd jobs, I just never had time
to study.” But before he left, word came of his acceptance
as a temporary summer-season Pullman porter. On a night
train from Buffalo to Pittsburgh, at about 2 A.M. his buzzer
rang, and a sleepless white man and his wife each wanted
a glass of warm milk. Dad brought the milk, he said, “and I
tried to leave, but the man was just talkative and seemed
surprised that I was a working college student. He asked
lots of questions, then he tipped well in Pittsburgh.” After
saving every possible cent, when Dad returned to college
that September of 1916, the college president showed him
correspondence from the man on the train—a retired Curtis
Publishing Company executive named R. S. M. Boyce—
who had written asking the cost of one full year’s everything,
then had sent his check. “It was about $503.15 with tuition,
dormitory, meals, and books included,” Dad said, and he
scored marks that later saw him win a graduate-study
scholarship that the Cornell University School of Agriculture
began giving that year to the top agricultural student at each
of the Negro land-grant colleges.
And that, I told the people, was how our dad got his
masters degree at Cornell, and then was a professor, so
that we, his children, grew up amid those kinds of
influences, which when put together with what a lot of other
people on our mama’s side also had done, was why we
were fortunate enough to be there seeing Dad off now with
me as an author, George as an assistant director of the
United States Information Agency, Julius as a U. S. Navy
Department architect, and Lois as a teacher of music.

We flew Dad’s body then to Arkansas, where a second
ceremony was thronged with his friends from Pine Bluff’s
AM&N University and its area where as the dean of
agriculture, Dad had rounded out his total of forty years of
educating. As we knew he would have wanted, we drove
him through the campus and twice along the road where the
street sign near the agricultural building said “S. A. Haley
Drive,” as it had been named when he retired.
The Pine Bluff service over, we took Dad to where he
had previously told us he wanted to lie—in the Veterans’
Cemetery in Little Rock. Following his casket as it was
taken to Section 16, we stood and watched Dad lowered
into grave No. 1429. Then we whom he had fathered—
members of the seventh generation from Kunta Kinte—
walked away rapidly, averting our faces from each other,
having agreed we wouldn’t cry.
So Dad has joined the others up there. I feel that they do
watch and guide, and I also feel that they join me in the
hope that this story of our people can help to alleviate the
legacies of the fact that preponderantly the histories have
been written by the winners.

ALEX HALEY
(1921-1992)

A BIOGRAPHY
Alexander Murray Palmer Haley was born in Ithaca, New
York, on August 11, 1921. The oldest of three sons
(George and Julius Haley), Haley was born to Simon and
Bertha (Palmer) Haley. He grew up in the South in an
African-American family also mixed with Irish and
Cherokee ancestry. Haley’s father, Simon, was a professor
of agriculture who had also served in World War I. Haley
always spoke proudly of his father and the incredible
obstacles of racism he had overcome.
At the age of fifteen, Alex graduated from high school. He
attended Elizabeth City Teachers College for two years
and on May 24, 1939, he began his twenty-year service
with the Coast Guard. He enlisted as a seaman and then
became a third-class petty officer in the rate of mess
attendant, one of the few enlisted designators open to
African-Americans at that time. It was during his service in
the Pacific Theater of Operations that Haley taught himself
the craft of writing stories.
After World War II, Haley was able to petition the Coast
Guard to allow him to transfer into the field of journalism. By

1949, he had become a first-class petty officer in the rate of
chief journalist. He then rose to chief petty officer until his
retirement from the Coast Guard in 1959. Alex Haley was
the first and only person to receive an honorary degree
from the Coast Guard Academy, presented by President
George H. W. Bush, and he had the singular honor of
having a Coast Guard Cutter named after him. Alex Haley’s
numerous awards and decorations from the Coast Guard
include the American Defense Service Medal, World War II
Victory Medal, and the National Defense Service Medal.
In 1941 Haley married Nannie Branch. The marriage
ended in divorce in 1964, and in the same year Haley
married Juliette Collins. They divorced in 1972. His third
wife was the former Myra Lewis of Los Angeles.
After his retirement from the Coast Guard, Haley began
his writing career and eventually became a senior editor for
Reader’s Digest. Throughout the 1960s, Haley was
responsible for some of Reader’s Digest ’s most notable
interviews, including an interview with American Nazi Party
leader George Lincoln Rockwell. Haley conducted the first
Playboy Interview for Playboy magazine. Following this,
Alex conducted a series of interviews with jazz legend
Miles Davis, the first of which appeared in the September
1962 issue. His interviews with Malcolm X lead to his first
book, The Autobiography of Malcolm X: As Told to Alex
Haley (1965). Selling more than six million copies by 1977
in the United States and other countries, it was translated
into eight languages. This literary work accorded Haley true
fame as an author and was later named by Time magazine
one of the ten most important nonfiction books of the
twentieth century.
In 1976 Haley published Roots: The Saga of an
American Family, a novel based loosely on his family’s
history, starting with the story of Kunta Kinte, kidnapped in
The Gambia in 1767 to be sold as a slave in the United
States. This work involved ten years of research,
intercontinental travel and writing. Haley went to the village
of Juffure where Kunta Kinte grew up, which was still in
existence, and listened to a tribal historian tell the story of

Kinte’s capture. Haley also traced the records of the ship,
the Lord Ligonier, which carried his ancestor to America.
Roots was eventually published in thirty-seven
languages. It won the 1977 National Book Award as well as
a Pulitzer Prize and went on to become a landmark
television miniseries in 1977. The book and film both
reached unparalleled success. The television miniseries
attracted a record-breaking 130 million viewers when it
was serialized on television. The series set records for the
number of viewers, and the Sunday night finale achieved
the highest ranking for a single television production. Roots
emphasized that African-Americans have a long history
and that not all of that history is lost, as many had previously
believed. Its popularity sparked an increased public interest
in genealogy as well.
Roots and Alex Haley attracted controversy over the
years—which comes with the territory of path-breaking
iconic books, particularly on the topic of race. In 1978,
novelist Harold Courlander sued Alex Haley, claiming that
portions of Courlander’s novel The African had been
plagiarized in Roots. After a trial, Haley settled out of court
for $650,000 after admitting that several passages of
Roots were copied from Courlander’s novel. However,
Haley stated that the appropriation of these passages was
unintentional and also claimed that researchers helping him
had given him this material without citing the source. The
settlement permitted the continued publication of Roots as
Alex Haley wrote it. In 1988 Margaret Walker also sued
him, claiming that Roots violated the copyright for her novel
Jubilee. Her case was dismissed by the court.
There were also some questions about whether Roots
was fact or fiction, and whether Alex Haley confused these
two issues. Haley addressed these issues head-on in the
book itself:
To the best of my knowledge and of my effort,
every lineage statement within Roots is from
either my African or American families’ carefully
preserved oral history, much of which I have been

able conventionally to corroborate with
documents. Those documents, along with the
myriad textural details of what were contemporary
indigenous lifestyles, cultural history, and such that
g i ve Roots flesh have come from years of
intensive research in fifty-odd libraries, archives,
and other repositories on three continents.
Since I wasn’t around when most of the story
occurred, by far most of the dialogue and most of
the incidents are of necessity a novelized
amalgam of what I know took place together with
what my researching let me to plausibly feel took
place.
Haley received the NAACP’s Spingarn Medal in 1977.
Four thousand deans and department heads of colleges
and universities throughout the country in a survey
conducted by Scholastic Magazine selected Haley as
America’s foremost achiever in the literature category. (Dr.
Martin Luther King, Jr. was selected in the religious
category.) The ABC-TV network presented another series,
Roots: The Next Generation, in February 1979 (also
written by Haley). Roots had sold almost five million copies
by December 1978 and had been reprinted in twenty-three
languages.
Haley’s later literary projects included a history of the
town of Henning, Tennessee, and a biography of Frank
Wills, the security guard who discovered the Watergate
break-in. In the television series Palmerstown, USA (1980),
Haley collaborated with the producer Norman Lear. The
series was based on Haley’s boyhood experiences in
Henning.
A Different Kind of Christmas (1988) was a short
novella, in which a slave manages to escape and as a
result, the son of slaveholding southern parents slowly
realizes that the practice of slavery is wrong. Then, in the
late 1980s, Haley began working on a second historical
novel based on another branch of his family, traced through
his grandmother Queen—the daughter of a black slave

woman and her white master. Queen (1993) was a strong
epic novel, which focused on Simon Alexander Haley’s
side of the family.
In 1987 Haley left his home in Beverly Hills, California,
and moved to Tennessee, his family’s home state. Haley
died of a heart attack on February 10, 1992, at the
Swedish Hospital Medical Center in Seattle, Washington,
before he could complete Queen. At his request, the novel
was finished by David Stevens and was published as A lex
Haley’s Queen. It was subsequently made into a movie in
1993.
Haley was posthumously awarded the Korean War
Service Medal from the government of South Korea ten
years after his death. This award, created in 1999, did not
exist during Haley’s lifetime, but demonstrates how both his
life and his legacy continue to impact the lives and works of
people throughout the world to this day.

On October 10, 1991, Alex Haley gave a speech
to the employees of Reader’s Digest that
included information about the writing of Roots
while traveling on freight ships. This is an
excerpt from the live recording.

ALEX HALEY ON THE WRITING OF
ROOTS
Reprinted by permission from Reader’s Digest.

There’s something about when you go out on a ship and
usually, I go out on freight ships, cargo ships; I wouldn’t get
caught on a liner. How can you write with 800 people
dancing? But on the freight ships, not many of them carry
passengers, but those which do carry passengers carry a
total of twelve, a maximum of twelve people. The law is that
if a ship carries more than twelve, it must have a doctor on
board. So the people who go out there tend to be very quiet
people. It is said, not too far amiss, that excitement on a
cargo ship is when someone finishes a jigsaw puzzle.
But what I do is I go and work my principal work hours
from about 10:30 at night until daybreak. The world is yours
at that point. Most of all the passengers are asleep.
Sometimes there are only three other people awake on the
ship. On the bridge, the officer of the day and the
helmsman, and the guy who makes the rounds punching
clocks every hour, and you. The thing I particularly love is
when you get in there and you’ve got all your notes and your
research and stuff literally in the one room with you. It’s
sometimes up on your bunk, and you sleep with it all by your
feet. It’s a lovely feeling—like being in the womb with what
you are trying to do. I find myself from time to time, when I’m
writing, I’ll do things, visual things. I’ll remember you as an
audience. I’ll remember what you look like as a group. And
it’s just kind of nice. And I think, well, I want to write this
thing so they will read this or they’ll print that. It just comes
into your head, things like that.
You’re out there by yourself. When you get far enough
along, you really start to talk with your characters. I had so
many conversations with Chicken George and Kunta Kinte
it wasn’t even funny. It was natural. I’m sitting up in my
underwear, by myself, minding my business, talking with
them. And that was just as routine as it could be. Come
around about 1:30 in the morning—you’ve been working
since 10:30 and decide you’re going to take a little break.
So you get up and you walk up on the deck. And you put
your hand on the top rail, your foot on the bottom rail, and
you look up. The first most striking thing is, man, you look
up and there are heavenly objects as you never saw them

before. You find yourself looking at planets at sea. And
what you start to realize is that you never saw clear air
before—even out here where it’s clear compared to New
York City. This is nowhere near like it is at sea. In some
latitudes, down off West Africa, South America, on the night
of a full moon, there are times when you get into an illusion.
If you could just stretch a little further, you feel like you could
touch it. And you are out there amidst all this, God’s
firmament, and then you stand and you feel through the sole
of your shoe a fine vibration and you realize that’s man at
work. That’s a huge diesel turbine, thirty-five feet down
under the water, driving this ship like a small island through
the water. Still standing there now you start hearing a slight
hissing sound. You realize that’s the skin of the ship cutting
through the resistance of the ocean. With all that going on,
feeling these man things and seeing the God things, that’s
about as close to holy as you’re going to ever get.
I find that’s why I just love to get out in the ocean. And I
find that you are really out there, find yourself thinking in
ways you haven’t thought before. We are here doing the
jobs we all do. We really operate by rote. You don’t think.
You do something you’ve done 500 times before and you
know how to do it. But out there you find that your mind will
engage something almost like biscuit dough. And feel it
turning around and your mind can examine it and so forth.
And I’ve been really seriously thinking about maybe the
latter part of next year trying to see if I can’t set up a
schedule where I would spend one month at sea and one
month ashore right around the year. And that way I’d get my
work done. And I could come back here and be all the
things that you are as a kind of public writer.
As it is, it’s silly, but I would like to be cloned. I’d love to
have one person who was chained to a type writer,
computer, whatever. And the other one would be a public
writer who would go around talking about writing. And the
other would be a relatively normal human being. Something
like that. It’s the truth. Most of us who are writers get writers
and other creative people; I meet with a lot of creative
people.

I was talking with a dear buddy of mine, Quincy Jones,
two weeks ago. We were at New York for the funeral of
Miles Davis. We were talking about how you get caught up
in what’s called success. Once you have that blessing, it’s
so hard to do what you did in the first place to get it. Quincy
said he couldn’t remember when he composed anything.
And I know he hasn’t; he’s so successful. Miles, bless his
heart, was still playing his horn right up to the end. But lots
of people who are very successful have a hard time
working as well as they did before. I would tell you the truth.
The best writing I ever possibly could do was when, after
The Digest gave me the help to go to Africa and to go to
Europe, and I was not known and I could just take my time
and nobody there was pressing me. God, I don’t know how
long it took me. I told all kinds of lies to editors here about
when I would finish. But I was working slowly, slowly.
Let me tell you one thing more before we go. And I would
like to share this ’cause we’re talking about the essence of
writing now.
When I had done all the research, nine years, working in
between doing articles for other magazines and stuff, I was
now ready to write. I didn’t know where to go, didn’t know
what to do. I knew I had a monumental task. And I got on a
ship—this is where I started this freight ship thing called the
Villager. And I went from Long Beach, California,
completely around South America and back to Long
Beach. It was ninety-one days. And I had written from the
birth of Kunta Kinte through his capture. In the course of
this, that’s where I got into the habit of talking to your
character, I knew Kunta. I knew everything about Kunta. I
knew what he was going to do. What he had done.
Everything. And so I would just talk to him. And I had
become so attached to him that I knew now I had to put him
in the slave ship and bring him across the ocean. That was
the next part of the book. And I just really couldn’t quite
bring myself to write that. I was in San Francisco. I wrote
about forty pages and chunked it out. You know writers
know, and I know we’ve had this experience where you just
know that ain’t it. That ain’t what you want to say. And when

you write well, it isn’t a question so much of what you want
to say, it’s a question of feel. Does it feel like you want it to
feel? The feel starts coming into something around the
fourth rewrite.
And then I wrote twice more about forty pages and threw
it out. And I realized what my bother was. It was—I couldn’t
bring myself to feel like I was up to writing about Kunta
Kinte in that slave ship and me in a high-rise apartment. I
had to get closer to Kunta. I had run out of my money at The
Digest, lying so many times about when I’d finish, so I
couldn’t ask for any more. I don’t know where I got the
money from. I went to Africa. Put out the word I wanted to
get a ship coming from Africa to Florida to the U.S. I just
wanted to simulate crossing.
I went down to the country that was born of the U.S.
People went there. What was it? Liberia. And I got a ship
called, appropriately enough, the African Star. And I got on
this ship. She was carrying a partial cargo of raw rubber in
bails. And I got on as a passenger. I couldn’t tell the
captain, who was such a nice man, nor that mate what I
wanted to do because they couldn’t allow me to do it. But I
found one hold that was just about a third full of cargo and
there was an entryway into it with a long metal ladder down
to the bottom of the hold. I’m sure most of you don’t know
how big the hold of a ship is. But you could just about put
this auditorium in the hold of some big ships.
Down in there they had, on the deck, a long, wide, thick
piece of rough sawed timber. They called it dunnage. It’s
used to store between cargo to keep it from shifting in
rough seas. And what I did, after dinner the first night, I went
down, made my way down into this hold. Had a little pocket
light. I took off my clothing, to my underwear, and laid down
on my back on this piece of dunnage. I imagined; I’m going
to try to make believe I’m Kunta Kinte. I laid there and I got
cold and colder. Nothing seemed to come except how
ridiculous it was that I was doing this. By morning I had a
terrible cold. I went back up. And the next day with my cold,
the next night, I’m down doing the same thing. Well the third
night when I left the dinner table, I couldn’t make myself go

back down in that hold. I just felt so miserable. I don’t think I
ever felt quite so badly. And instead of going down in the
hold I went to the stern of the ship, the end of the ship, the
back part. And I’m standing up there with my hands on the
rail and looking down now where the propellers are beating
up this white froth. And in the froth are little luminous, green
phosphorescents. At sea you see that a lot. And I’m
standing there looking at it and all of a sudden it looked like
all my troubles just came on me. I owed everybody I knew.
Everybody I knew looked like they were on my case. Why
don’t you finish this foolish thing? You ought not be doing it
in the first place—talking about writing about black
genealogy.
That’s crazy. And so forth. All such stuff as that. And I was
just utterly miserable, didn’t feel like I had a friend in the
world. And then a thought came to me that was startling. It
wasn’t frightening. It was just startling. And I make a point of
saying it was not dramatic at all; it was just simply
something that happened. I thought to myself, hey, there’s a
cure for all this. You don’t have to go through all this mess.
And what the cure was, was simply all I had to do was step
through the rail and drop in the sea.
Now I say again, it wasn’t with any great dramatic thing at
all; it just simply arrived at me. And once having thought it,
standing there kind of musing about what I had just thought,
I began to feel quite good about it. I’ve since read things—
like people who were in a position about to freeze, felt
warm, or something like that prior to. And I’m standing
there; I guess I was half a second away from dropping into
the sea. And it wouldn’t have made a difference. Fine, that
would take care of it. You won’t owe anybody anything. The
hell with it and all that. You can go. Hell with the publishers
and the editors and all that and all this kind of thing.
And then again I stress it wasn’t dramatic; it was just sort
of like everyone of us has been dreaming and you heard
people speaking in a dream. And I began to hear voices,
which were positioned behind me. I could hear them. They
were not strident. They were just conversational. And I
somehow knew every one of them. Who they were. And

they were saying things like, no, don’t do that. No, you’re
doing the best you can. You just keep going. You go ahead.
And so forth. It was like that.
And I knew exactly who they were. They were Grandma.
They were Chicken George. They were Kunta Kinte. They
were my cousin, Georgia, who lived in Kansas City and had
passed away. They were all these people whom I had been
writing about. They were talking to me. It was like a dream.
I remember fighting myself loose from that rail, turning
around and I went scuttling like a crab up over the hatch.
And finally made my way back to my little stateroom and
pitched down, head first, face first, belly first on the bunk
and I cried dry. I cried more I guess than I’ve cried since I
was four years old, at least it seemed so.
And it was about midnight when I kind of got myself
together. I can’t really describe how it felt, but it was like
recovering from a vacuum or something. Then I got up and
the feeling was—you have been assessed and you’ve been
tried and you’ve been approved by all them who went
before. So go ahead. And then I went back down in the
hold. I had a terrible cold, head cold, flu-ish like. I had with
me a long, yellow tablet and some pencils. This time I did
not take my clothing off like I’d been doing before. I kept
them on because I was having such a bad cold. I laid down
on the piece of timber. I had the tablet there, when I would
think.
Now Kunta Kinte was lying in this position on a shelf in
the ship, the Lord Ligonier. She had left the Gambia River
July 5, 1767. She sailed two months, three weeks, two
days. Destination: Annapolis, Maryland. And he was lying
there. And others were in there with him whom he knew.
And what would he think?
What would be some of the things they would say? And
when they would come to me in the dark, I would write. You
know how you can write kind of large looping letters on
something.
And that was how I did every night, only eight nights.
From there, to this country, to Florida and when I got to
Florida, I remember rushing through the big, big Miami

Airport. I came in at 1 AM and I had to go to the other end.
Barely made the flight. Flew back to San Francisco. Got
with a doctor, Kimbro was his name. And he kind of
patched me up and gave me stuff and everything,
antibiotics and all until I got ready.
And then I sat down with those long, yellow tablets and
transcribed and then I began to write that part which is now
i n Roots as the chapter where Kunta Kinte crossed the
ocean in a slave ship. And that was probably the most
emotional experience I had in the whole thing. Again it all
really goes back to here, Reader’s Digest, the morning the
editors met at the place up there and said they believed in
it and they would sponsor me. So, thank you.

A condensed version of a portion of this work first appeared in Reader’s Digest in the
May and June 1974 issues. Copyright © 1974 by Reader’s Digest Association.
Copyright renewed 2002 by Myran Haley, Cynthia Haley, Lydia Haley and William
Haley.
Copyright © 1974 Alex Haley. Copyright renewed 2004 by Myran Haley, Cynthia Haley,
Lydia Haley and William Haley.

Alex Haley on the writing of Roots.
Special contents of this edition Copyright © 2007 The Roots Venture, c/o IPW LLC,
2049 Century Park East, Suite 2720, Los Angeles, CA 90067
Published by Vanguard Books
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the
publisher. For information and inquiries, address Vanguard Books, 387 Park Avenue
South, 12th Floor, NYC, NY 10016, or call (800) 343-4499.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Haley, Alex.
Roots : the saga of an American family : the 30th anniversary edition / Alex Haley.
p. cm.
Originally published: Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1976.
eISBN : 978-1-593-15466-0
1. Haley, Alex. 2. Haley, Alex—Family. 3. Haley family. 4. Kinte family. 5. African
Americans—Biography. 6. African American families. I. Title.
E185.97.H24A33 2007
929’.20973—dc22
[B]
2007008822
Vanguard books are available at special discounts for bulk purchases in the U.S. by
corporations, institutions, and other organizations. For more information, please
contact the Special Markets Department at the Perseus Books Group, 2300 Chestnut
Street, Suite 200, Philadelphia, PA 19103, or call (800) 810-4145, extension 5000, or
e-mail special.markets@perseusbooks.com.

